11.01 SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES: AUSTERE CARE

AUSTERE MEDICAL CARE CONCEPT

Austere Medical Care (“Austere Care”) is a modified standard of care provided during disaster
situations when medical resources, supplies and / or medical personnel are extremely limited
or unavailable. Situations in which this may occur include an earthquake with major
infrastructure damage or biological events with depletion of health care resources, or
disruptions to the normal supply chains. The goal of a modified standard of care is to provide a
basic (austere) level of medical care that is less time and resource intensive. By modifying the
standard of care to a more basic (austere) level, fewer medical resources are provided to an
individual person, but, instead are distributed to a greater number of individuals in a given
population.   The intent of austere medical care standards is to attempt to do the most good for
the greatest number of people during a disaster situation.

Austere Care is only rendered in the setting of disaster or isolation and requires activation as
described in this protocol.  Austere Care is never considered advantageous over normal
emergency medical care and cannot be used in settings where normal or comprehensive
emergency care is available.

ACTIVATION/DEACTIVATION OF AUSTERE CARE

Austere care is only authorized by the County Health Officer or his or her designee.
Communication of the decision to use Austere Care will come through the Incident Command
System chain of authority.  Medical units will render care as described in the following
protocols.  If warranted, standard emergency medical care protocols can be utilized at the
discretion of the Medical Group Supervisor depending on local conditions.  Austere Care is
designed to be a “floor” level of medical care, which may be superseded or augmented as
conditions permit.

AUSTERE CARE GUIDELINES
The following table identifies changes to the treatment of patient conditions covered in the
Standard Treatment Protocols under Austere Care:

CONDITION
Abdominal
Discomfort

Allergic
Reaction
Altered Mental
Status
Cardiac Arrest

Treat for shock if indicated.  Trial of PO fluids.  Trial of over-the-counter
antacid if available.

TREATMENT

Epinephrine or Diphenhydramine IM if indicated.

Check glucose. Treat with oral or IV Dextrose if indicated.

•  V-Fib/ Pulseless V-Tach: If no return of spontaneous circulation (no

pulses) after 3 shocks, cease resuscitation efforts.

•  Do not initiate resuscitation of other cardiac arrest rhythms.

Page 1 of 2

San Francisco EMS Agency
Effective: 03/01/15
Supersedes: 01/01/11

Chest
Discomfort /
Pain
Childbirth

Aspirin and Nitroglycerin

Oxygen and IV fluid hydration if needed. Deliver baby.

Near Drowning  Oxygen and protect from hypothermia.

Pain Control

•  Morphine
•  Help patient self-administer over-the-counter oral pain medications as

appropriate & available (e.g. Tylenol; Ibuprofen).

Respiratory
Distress

Bronchospasm: Albuterol
CHF: Nitroglycerin

Stroke

Aspirin

Trauma

Follow standard treatment guidelines for treatment of individual conditions.
If shock develops and does not respond to initial IV infusion of 2 liters of
normal saline, provide palliative care only.

The following table identifies treatment for conditions that are not found in the standard
treatment protocols:

CONDITION
Anxiety /
Depression

TREATMENT

Reassure patient; assist with finding supportive group of others such as
friends, relatives or volunteers.  Lorazepam OR diazepam if needed for
restraint/sedation.

Dehydration

Oral rehydration solutions (Gatorade, sports drinks, water, juices.)

Fracture Care

Immobilization, ice pack, pain control with Morphine or over-the-counter
pain medication.

Palliative Care
(Comfort care
for dying
patients)

Nausea /
Vomiting

Wound Care

Reassurance, place patient with supportive others. Morphine or over-the-
counter pain medication.

Antiemetic if available, oral rehydration solutions.

Clean wounds with soap and water. Remove foreign bodies and debris.
Irrigate with normal saline or clean water as available. Apply dressings.
Qualified personnel may perform suturing.  Wounds that are over 6 hours
old cannot be sutured.  Dressings should be changed daily.  Signs of infection
(fever, pus drainage, red streaks on skin, increased pain from wound)
warrant triage to higher level of care.

Page 2 of 2

San Francisco EMS Agency
Effective: 03/01/15
Supersedes: 01/01/11

