11.04 SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES FIELD AMPUTATION

BLS Treatment

If crush injury, refer to Protocol 11.02 Crush Syndrome.

•
•  Request Amputation Team (minimum 3-person procedure, see Base Hospital Contact
Criteria) consider the following indications in a patient with an entrapped limb:
•  Scene safety posing an immediate risk to patient’s life.
•  Patient decompensation with death likely to occur before extrication.
•  Minimal attachment or severe mutilation of non-survivable limb.
•  Deceased body is blocking access to a potentially live patient.

•  Clear access to chest, head and as far distally on entrapped extremity as possible.
•  Assess circulation, airway, breathing, and responsiveness.
•  As indicated: Oxygen, Spinal Motion Restriction, position of comfort, splint suspected

fractures/instability

•  Bandage wounds/control bleeding as indicated, refer to Protocol 4.05 Extremity Bleeding

Control

ALS Treatment

•
IV or IO of Normal Saline TKO.
•
If SBP <90, administer Normal Saline fluid bolus
•  For pain: may administer Fentanyl and Ketamine
•  Attempt to obtain a full set of vitals and place patient on monitor as able.
•  Maintain visualization and verbal communication with patient for close monitoring.
•  Expose extremity as much as possible. Assist amputation team during procedure, as

needed.

•  Transport amputated limb with patient to hospital following procedure.
•  Wash amputated limb with Normal Saline to remove contaminants.
•  Wrap amputated limb in moistened gauze.
•  Place wrapped amputated limb in a dry plastic bag.
•  Place bag with amputated limb in a separate bag filled with ice.
•  Do not place amputated limb directly onto ice.
Comments

•  Do not delay life-saving patient care to perform interventions.
•  Rapid transport of the post-amputation patient to a trauma center is critical.
Paramedic may assist with field amputation. Performing amputation/procedural sedation is not
in the current paramedic scope of practice and sedation medications may only be administered
by physicians or nurses in the field.
Amputation Team Guidelines (Physicians ONLY)
•  Patient consent.
•  Document scene
•  Assign additional roles prior to amputation:

•  Movement of patient to a designated pit stop following amputation.

Page 1 of 3

SAN FRANCISCO EMS AGENCY
Effective: 10/01/20245
Supersedes: 03/01/151

11.04 SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES FIELD AMPUTATION

•  Hemorrhage control and dressing of stump.
•  Ambulance and transport EMS crew.
•  Primary survey and resuscitation.

•  Prep extremity.
•  Establish IV access, 2 IVs if possible.
•  Establish proximal and distal control, if possible.
•  Maintain clean, if not sterile, technique.
•  Sedation: Preferred medication is Midazolam.
•  Anesthesia: Preferred medications is Ketamine for prolonged procedure.
•  Provide pain control: Preferred medication is Fentanyl.
•  Perform amputation using scalpel, cable saw and extremity tourniquet, as available.
•  Reassess patient and initiate resuscitation efforts.
•  Accompany patient during transport to hospital.

Page 2 of 3

SAN FRANCISCO EMS AGENCY
Effective: 10/01/20245
Supersedes: 03/01/151

11.04 SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES FIELD AMPUTATION

•  Equipment list for amputation: (should be kept in a “go bag” accessible for rapid transport

with team) EQUIPMENT NEEDS: O.R. amputation pack with:
o  Cable saw
o  Scalpel with #  10 blade
o  Scalpel with # 15 blade
o  Pneumatic tourniquet(s)
o  Non-pneumatic tourniquet(s)
o  Gauze
o  Kerlex
o  Betadine and betadine applicators
o  Needle driver
o  Tissue forceps, long and short
o  4-0 Ethilon suture material on a curved needle
o  Bone wax
o  Coagulation dressing material
o  Fentanyl 500 micrograms
o  Midazolam 20 milligrams
o  Ketamine 1000 milligrams
o  Syringes assorted sizes
o  Needles assorted sizes

Training requirements of Amputation Team:
•  All personnel: Current licensure and credentialing at hospital of origin.
•  Operator: A designated Emergency Medicine Physician with field amputation training. If
available and by request, a General Surgeon or Orthopedist (with O.R. privileges).
•  Assistant Operator: Anesthesiologist or Emergency Physician (with sedation privileges).
•  Second Assistant: Operating Room technician, Emergency Department nurse, or Emergency

Department technician, or paramedic on scene.

•  Documentation of field amputation on prehospital Patient Care Record.
•  Sentinel Event: 100% review by Trauma System Audit Committee and Hospital Process

Improvement Committee.

•  Team activation: Requested by scene commander; dispatched by request through

Department of Emergency Communications to Base Hospital Physician.

Base Hospital Contact Criteria

Page 3 of 3

SAN FRANCISCO EMS AGENCY
Effective: 10/01/20245
Supersedes: 03/01/151

