8.05 PEDIATRIC CARDIAC ARREST: NEONATAL RESUSCITATION

BLS Treatment

•  Assess circulation, airway, breathing, and responsiveness.
•  Oxygen as indicated.

HR < 60
CPR at rate of 120/min, compression to ventilation ratio 3:1.

HR > 100, but persistent cyanosis and/or labored breathing
•  Blow by Oxygen using non-rebreather mask at 100%.

HR < 100, gasping or apnea

•  BVM rate of 40-60/min with 100% Oxygen.
•

If HR < 100 persists, reposition airway and adjust ventilation rate.

Current American Heart Association Guidelines concerning Emergency Cardiac Care
assessments and interventions shall always take precedence over local protocols when there is
a conflict concerning techniques of resuscitation.

ALS Treatment

•  Advanced airway if indicated
•  Provide grief support and referrals for on-site survivors as needed.

HR < 60
•

If thick meconium and baby is not vigorous, and there are signs of obstruction, perform
deep tracheal suctioning using ETT and meconium aspirator.
IV/IO with Normal Saline TKO.

•
•  Epinephrine: 0.01 mg/kg IVP/IO q 3-5 minutes throughout resuscitation.
•  Check blood glucose. If blood glucose <60 mg/dl: administer Dextrose.

Do NOT administer Naloxone. If there is a suspicion that the neonate is opioid exposed, support
breathing using positive pressure ventilation

Notes

SAN FRANCISCO EMS AGENCY
Effective: 10/1/25
Supersedes: 11/1/17

Page 1 of 1

Birth

Term gestation?
Good tone?
Breathing or crying?

NO

•  Warm and maintain normal

YES

Infant stays with mother for routine care:
•  Warm and maintain normal temperature
•
•
•  Dry
•  Ongoing evaluation

Position airway
Clear secretions if needed

temperature
Position airway
Clear secretions if needed

•
•
•  Dry
•

Stimulate

Within
1 minute

Apneas or gasping?
HR < 100/min?

NO

HR > 100, labored breathing
or persistent cyanosis?

YES

•
•
•

BVM with high flow Oxygen at rate of 40-60/min
Reposition airway and adjust ventilation rate
SpO2 and ECG monitor

Position and clear airway

•
•  High flow Oxygen by blow

by NRB

HR < 60/min?

NO

YES

•
•

CPR at rate of 120/min
Compression/ventilation ratio 3:1

If HR is persistent < 60/min

•
•
•

•
•
•

Continue CPR at 120/min with 3:1 ratio
Start IV/IO
If thick meconium, baby is not vigorous, and there are signs of obstruction, perform
deep tracheal suctioning using ETT and meconium aspirator
Epinephrine: 0.01 mg/kg IVP/IO q 3-5 minutes throughout resuscitation
Check blood glucose. If < 60 mg/dl administer Dextrose: 2 ml/kg IV/IO (0.2 g/kg)
If suspected hypovolemic shock, Normal Saline Bolus: 10 ml/kg IV/IO

Targeted SpO2 After Birth

1 min 60%-65%

2 min 65%-70%

3 min 70%-75%

4 min 75%-80%

5 min 80%-85%

10 min 85%-95%

Do NOT administer Naloxone. If there is a suspicion that the neonate is opioid
exposed, support breathing using positive pressure ventilation

Effective: 10/01/25
Supersedes: 11/01/17

