5.01 VAGINAL BLEEDING (NOT RELATED TO LABOR)
5.01 VAGINAL BLEEDING (NOT RELATED TO LABOR)

BLS – FAQ Link
BLS – FAQ Link
BLS – FAQ Link

Assess circulation, airway, breathing and responsiveness
If reported trauma to the vaginal area, direct pressure should be offered, and if
appropriate.
If patient prefers and is able, allow patient to apply direct pressure

IV/IO of Normal Saline TKO.
IV/IO of Normal Saline TKO.
Assess for signs of shock,
Assess for signs of shock,
if SBP < 90, Normal Saline fluid bolus.
if SBP < 90, Normal Saline fluid bolus.

Comments

•  Do not pack the vagina with any material to stop bleeding.
•

Inquire if patient has known pregnancy status or last menstrual period. If patient reports pregnancy consider
obstetric etiologies
If patient reports sexual assault or meets trauma criteria, transport to appropriate specialty center

•

Effective: 10/01/24
Supersedes: 01/30/17

5.01 Vaginal Bleeding (Not Related to Labor)

Vaginal Bleeding (Not Related to Labor)
BLS Treatment

•  Assess circulation, airway, breathing, and responsiveness.
•  Position of comfort.
•

If reported trauma to the vaginal area, direct pressure should be offered, if appropriate. If
patient prefers and is able, allow patient to apply direct pressure.

•  Place pad or large dressing over vaginal opening.

IV / IO of Normal Saline TKO.

•
•  Assess for signs of shock, if SBP < 90, Normal Saline fluid bolus.

ALS Treatment

Comments

•  DO NOT pack the vagina with any material to stop bleeding. A bulky dressing or pad may be

•

used externally to absorb blood flow.
Inquire if patient has known pregnancy status or last known menstrual period. If patient
reports pregnancy, consider obstetric etiologies to vaginal bleeding.

•  Consider ruptured ectopic pregnancy in a woman of childbearing age with signs of shock.

•

If patient reports sexual assault or meets trauma criteria transport to appropriate specialty
center

                                                                                         Page 1 of 1

SAN FRANCISCO EMS AGENCY
Effective: 10/01/24
Supersedes 01/30/17

