7.02 ORAL ENDOTRACHEAL INTUBATION

INDICATIONS

•  Unconscious, apneic, or near apneic, patients without a gag reflex ≥8 year of age

PROCEDURE

1.  Place patient in correct position.
2.  Ventilate the patient with BVM ventilations with adequate tidal volume and rate

for 1-3 mins with 100% Oxygen, avoid  hyperventilation.
Instruct partner to place patient on cardiac and pulse oximeter monitors.

3.
4.  Select a proper ETT.
5.
6.  Select proper sized blade and visualize landmarks (Epiglottis, posterior notch, vocal

Insert stylet. If using video laryngoscopy, insert rigid stylet.

cords).

Insert and visualize the ETT 2-3 cm past the cords.

7.  Suction as needed.
8.
9.  Attempts should be limited to a fall in HR or Pulse Ox. or 30 seconds per attempt.
10.  Provide apneic oxygenation using high flow (>15 LPM) nasal cannula between attempts

when two reliable sources of oxygen are available.

11.  Remove stylet, inflate cuff and bag ventilate.
12.  Confirm position with the EtCO2 detection monitor and at least one (1) of the

following methods

▪  Presence of equal breath sounds and equal chest rise.
▪  Absence of epigastric breath sounds.
▪  Misting or fogging in the ETT.
▪  Visualization of the tube remaining through the vocal cords with direct or

video laryngoscopy.

13.  Continuously monitor with the End Tidal CO2 monitor.
14.  Secure the tube.  Consider cervical collar to prevent extubation.
15.  Reassess tube placement after each patient movement (may be done with CO2

detection device).

16.  If any doubt about proper tube placement, or unable to capture ETCO2 due to
mechanical issues, use visualization with direct or video laryngoscopy to
confirm.

17.  Consider use of a gum elastic bougie for difficult airways.

Page 1 of 1

  Effective: 10/1/25
                                                                                                Supersedes: 04/01/25

SAN FRANCISCO EMS AGENCY

