7.03 SUPRAGLOTTIC AIRWAY (iGel)

INDICATIONS
iGel insertion may be performed on those patients who meet ALL of the following criteria:

•  Patients of age 28 days and older
•  Are unconscious and without purposeful movement
•  Do not have a gag reflex
•  Apnea

INSERTION PROCEDURE

1.  Prepare, position, and pre-oxygenate the patient.
1.  Select an appropriately sized device.
2.  Apply water-soluble lubricant to distal end of tube.
3.  Place patient’s head in a neutral position.
4.  With non-dominant hand, hold mouth open and apply chin lift.
5.  Position device so the cuff faces the patient’s chin.
6.  Introduce the leading tip into the mouth in a direction towards the hard palate.
7.  Glide the device downward and backwards along the hard palate with a

continuous but gentle push until a definitive resistance is felt.

8.  Attach BVM and initiate ventilation.
9.  Assess ventilation:

•  Rise and fall of the chest
•  Bilateral lung sounds
•  Confirm placement with CO2 detector
•  Gastric auscultation
•

If breath sounds are present continue to ventilate.

10. If there is any question about the proper placement of the iGel, remove device and

ventilate the patient with BVM for 30 seconds and repeat.

11. Secure the tube with commercial device or tape.
12. Secure the tube with commercial device or tape.
13. Continue to monitor the patient for proper tube placement throughout prehospital

treatment and transport.

Page 1 of 1

SAN FRANCISCO EMS AGENCY
Effective: 10/01/22
Supersedes 4/1/22

