7.10 12-LEAD ELECTROCARDIOGRAM PROCEDURE

INDICATIONS
Any patient with known or suspected Acute Coronary Syndrome (ACS). Examples:

•  Chest pain
•  Upper abdominal pain
•  Discomfort or tightness radiating to the jaw, left shoulder or arm
•  Nausea
•  Diaphoresis
•  Dyspnea
•  Anxiety
•  Syncope/dizziness
•  Other “suspicious symptoms”
•  Known treatment for ACS

PROCEDURE

1.  Input the following MANDATORY patient information PRIOR to acquiring 12-lead EKG:

a)  Patient Last Name + First Initial
b)  Gender
c)  Age
d)  Under the patient ID field, list ambulance unit number. List as “SFFD 74,” etc. to

avoid confusion between ambulance unit number and patient age.

2.  Attach EKG leads to the patient (limb leads to the upper arms, ankles and six chest

leads) and perform EKG.

•  V1: right 4th intercostal space
•  V2: left 4th intercostal space
•  V3: halfway between V2 and V4
•  V4: left 5th intercostal space, mid-clavicular line
•  V5: horizontal to V4, anterior axillary line
•  V6: horizontal to V5, mid-axillary line

3.  Serial 12-Lead EKGs en-route are encouraged.

STEMI EKG CRITERIA

•

If the EKG indicates an ST elevation MI by either of the methods below, transport to an
approved STAR Cardiac Receiving Center according to Policy 5000 Destination.
o  Convex or flat ST segment elevation of more than 1 mm (one small box) in two or

more contiguous leads.

Page 1 of 2

SAN FRANCISCO EMS AGENCY

Effective: 10/1/25
Supersedes: 4/1/22

7.10 12-LEAD ELECTROCARDIOGRAM PROCEDURE

o  EKG machine interpretation ***ACUTE STEMI*** or similar wording.

•  For inconclusive EKG’s, Base Hospital contact with EKG transmission may be utilized for

physician consultation.

•  Provide early notification to the STAR facility per Policy 3020 Field to Hospital
Communications. Transmit the EKG (if capable) to the receiving facility.

DOCUMENTATION

•  MANDATORY labeling of ALL 12-Lead EKGs with the four patient identifiers listed under

procedures.

•  PCR:

Interpretation of the 12-lead EKG (leads, ST elevation in millimeters)

o  Age and gender
o
o  Location of reciprocal changes (if applicable)
o  Symptoms (including presence or absence of chest pain)
o  Significant vital signs and physical findings
o  Complete PCR field indicating a pre-arrival hospital notification for STEMI.
o  Attach a copy (or electronic equivalent) of the EKG to the hospital copy and the

file copy of the PCR

Page 2 of 2

SAN FRANCISCO EMS AGENCY

Effective: 10/1/25
Supersedes: 4/1/22

