7.11 Spinal Motion Restriction

INDICATION
Patients who present following decelerating or blunt force injury suspicious for head or neck
trauma with any of the following should have Spinal Motion Restriction:

•  Midline back or neck pain.
•  Numbness, weakness or paresthesias of the extremities.
•  Blunt and or penetrating injury to the head or neck. Penetrating trauma does not

require SMR unless spinal injury is suspected.

•  Altered mental status of unknown etiology with traumatic injury suspected.

Spinal Motion Restriction is NOT indicated if the patient meets ALL the following criteria:

•  Age <65.
•  No decrease or change in baseline mental or neurological status.
•  No suspected or witnessed axial load injury to head.
•  No numbness, weakness or paresthesias of the extremities.
•  No significant distracting injuries.
•  Reliable translation for any language barrier.
•  No vertebral column injury noted on palpation.
•  Patient able to perform motor/sensory exam without deficits:

o  Wrist or finger flexion (both hands), plantarflexion (both feet), dorsiflexion (both

feet).

o  Check gross sensation in all extremities.
o  Check for parasthesias.

EMTs and Paramedics shall apply or direct application of SMR whenever extent of injury is in
question or patient history is unreliable.

PROCEDURE

1.  Limit flexion, extension, rotation and distraction of spine.
2.  Provide manual stabilization restricting gross motion.
3.  Reduce gross movement of patient.
4.  Prevent duplicating the damaging mechanism to spine.
5.  Regularly assess sensory and motor function.
6.  Obtain assistance (minimum 2-person procedure) to apply rigid cervical collar.  Alert and

co-operative patients may be allowed to self-limit motion, if appropriate, without
cervical collar.

NOTES

•  Methods used to achieve Spinal Motion Restriction that are allowable include (less

restrictive to more restrictive):

o  Lateral, semi-fowler’s or fowler’s position with cervical collar only.
o  Soft collars
o  Pillows
o  Mattress

Page 1 of 2

SAN FRANCISCO EMS AGENCY
Effective: 03/01/15
Supersedes: 01/07/13

7.11 Spinal Motion Restriction

o  Children’s car seats
o  KED, backboards with adequate padding
o  Head immobilizers and straps

In the event that a patient meets inclusion criteria for SMR, but cannot or will not
tolerate allowable methods, consider manual stabilization using additional rescuers,
tools or techniques to achieve limited spinal motion during extrication and transport.

•

•  Long spine boards are indicated only in patients who exhibit neurological deficits,
decreasing level of consciousness or inability to be screened for discontinuation of
spinal motion restriction.

Once SMR has been applied to a patient, it may NOT be discontinued in the field.

Page 2 of 2

SAN FRANCISCO EMS AGENCY
Effective: 03/01/15
Supersedes: 01/07/13

