7.14 REPORTING ASSAULT / ABUSE / HUMAN TRAFFICKING

INDICATION
Suspected assault, abuse, or human trafficking

PROCEDURE

1.  Follow appropriate treatment protocol for patient’s chief complaint, e.g. head trauma.
2.  If concerned about patient safety, transport to an appropriate Receiving Hospital.

Notify receiving hospital staff of your concerns.

3.  Contact appropriate law enforcement agency (see below).
4.  Provide emotional support to the victim and family.
5.  When in doubt, transport suspected abuse/neglect victims to a Receiving Hospital.
6.  Treat all clothing, medications, and personal items with patient at time of transport as

potential evidence. If these need to be removed from patient to facilitate
assessment/treatment, place them in a container labeled with patient identification and
document turnover of these materials to patient treatment team or law enforcement.

7.  The patient care report should be descriptive as possible of the conditions of the

elder/dependent adult and of his/her living situation.

REPORTING PROCEDURES (SUSPECTED OR ACTUAL INCIDENT)

Contact the appropriate agency by telephone as soon as possible to give a verbal report and
receive instructions on how to file a written report (generally must be done within 36-hours).

DOMESTIC VIOLENCE:

•  Notify local law enforcement and/or receiving hospital staff and document.

CHILD ABUSE:

•  Every effort should be made to transport pediatric patients who are potential child

abuse victims.

•  Notify local law enforcement and/or receiving hospital, CPS, San Francisco Human

Services Agency, and Child Abuse Hotline (800) 865-5553

ELDER ABUSE (age 65 or older):
If the any combination of the following circumstances are present, contact law enforcement,
APS and/or receiving hospital staff.

•  Evidence of either (a) decubitis ulcer on the elder/dependent adult, or (b) injuries on the
elder/dependent adult that are consistent with falls or an assault, i.e., possible fractures,
lacerations, bruises, or signs of inappropriate physical restraint.

•  Evidence of poor hygiene or living conditions for the elder/dependent adult (i.e.,

feces/urine soaked bedsheets or clothing, evidence of dehydration or malnutrition,
extreme clutter or filth in the home, extremely bad odors, evidence of human waste that

SAN FRANCISCO EMS AGENCY
   Effective: 10/01/2024
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Supersedes 01/07/13
Page 1 of 3

7.14 REPORTING ASSAULT / ABUSE / HUMAN TRAFFICKING

has not been properly disposed of, such as dirty adult diapers, or waste being kept in
buckets or by other inappropriate means).
Identifiable caretaker(s) for the elder/dependent adult, whether or not present at the
scene at the time of the paramedics responding.

•

The report by the paramedic should be descriptive as possible of the conditions of the
elder/dependent adult, and of his/her living situation, including any odors, and the extent of
poor hygiene or filth in the residence or facility.

ELDER ABUSE AT A LICENSED HEALTH CARE FACILITY BY FACILITY STAFF:

California Department of Health
Services
Division of Licensing and Certification
350 90th Street
Daly City, CA  94105
(650) 301-9971 / (800) 554-0353

OR

Ombudsman
(for Skilled Nursing Facility Complaints)
6221 Geary Boulevard
San Francisco, CA  94121
(415) 751-9788

ELDER ABUSE AT HOME OR ABUSE BY A VISITOR OR ANOTHER RESIDENT AT A LICENSED
HEALTH CARE FACILITY:

•  San Francisco Human Services Agency – Adult Protective Services,
•  Adult Abuse Hotline (415) 355-6700 (24-hour number)

DEPENDANT ADULT AT HOME OR ABUSE BY A VISITOR OR ANOTHER RESIDENT AT A
LICENSED HEALTH CARE FACILITY:

•  San Francisco Human Services Agency – Adult Protective Services,
•  Adult Abuse Hotline (415) 355-6700 (available 24-hrs)

SEXUAL ASSAULT:

•  Patients should be encouraged to be transported to San Francisco General Hospital

emergency department for evidence collection if the assault occurred less than 72-hours
prior to ambulance call.

•  Discourage bathing, washing, urination/defecation or changing clothes until arrival at

the hospital in order to preserve evidence.

HUMAN TRAFFICKING:
Signs of possible trafficking include situations where the individual(s):

•  Appears segregated from contact with first responders
•  Unable to speak with first responders without another person present (i.e. employer or

significant other)

•  Seems physically or emotionally bullied by another
•

Is not in control of their own ID/documents

SAN FRANCISCO EMS AGENCY
   Effective: 10/01/2024
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Supersedes 01/07/13
Page 2 of 3

7.14 REPORTING ASSAULT / ABUSE / HUMAN TRAFFICKING

•  Residing in unsuitable living conditions and/or with suspiciously heavy security

measures

•  Appears submissive and/or fearful
•  Approach and request help from others at the scene

If suspected human trafficking:

•  SFPD's Vice Crimes tip line (415) 643-6233 for suspected human trafficking.
•  San Francisco Collaborative against Human Trafficking (www.sfcaht.org) lists other local
resources or call the National Human Trafficking Resource Center (888) 373-7888.

•  Report suspicions to law enforcement and receiving hospital staff.
•

Include all observations in PCR.

SAN FRANCISCO EMS AGENCY
   Effective: 10/01/2024
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Supersedes 01/07/13
Page 3 of 3

