7.17 COVID-19 Point of Contact Testing

INDICATIONS

•  Any individual who has CDC defined symptoms for COVID-19, such as:

o  Fever
o  Chills
o  Cough
o  Shortness of breath
o  Fatigue
o  Muscle or body aches

o  Headache
o  New loss of taste or smell
o  Sore throat
o  Congestion or running nose
o  Nausea or vomiting
o  Diarrhea

•  Any individual who has been exposed to someone with known or suspected COVID-19.
•  Any individual going to an alternate destination or congregate setting may be tested

regardless of symptoms or lack thereof.

PROCEDURE

For instructions on testing and interpretation of results, see Appendix A below.

NOTES

•  Tests take approximately 15 minutes to perform and return a result.
•  The testing procedure and results should be documented within the PCR and reported

to the receiving provider.

•  The test should be reported to the public health department in accordance with your

provider policy.

•  Testing guidelines for destination facilities:

o  Full-Receiving Emergency Departments

▪  Ambulance crews should not wait for the result before turning patient
care over to department staff but should inform them of the result in
person or by phone as soon as the result is returned.

o  Alternate Destinations or Other Congregate Settings

•  Follow facility-specific guidelines around COVID-19 test status for incoming patients
•  A test should not be completed when it would likely add to an ambulance offload delay.

Page 1 of 3

SAN FRANCISCO EMS AGENCY
Effective 10/01/22
Supersedes: 4/01/22

7.17 COVID-19 Point of Contact Testing

APPENDIX A – BinaxNOW Test

Page 2 of 3

SAN FRANCISCO EMS AGENCY
Effective 10/01/22
Supersedes: 4/01/22

7.17 COVID-19 Point of Contact Testing

APPENDIX B – iHealth Test

Page 3 of 3

SAN FRANCISCO EMS AGENCY
Effective 10/01/22
Supersedes: 4/01/22

