6.01 AGITATED / VIOLENT PATIENT

Basic Life Support (BLS) Treatment

•  Assess scene safety and involve law enforcement if indicated to ensure safety.
•  Attempt verbal de-escalation. Verbal de-escalation is the first step in managing an

agitated/violent patient. Involve caregivers. Utilize an even vocal tone and be aware of body
language and threatening physical gestures.

•  Consider physical restraints (4-point, soft restraints with patient in supine position) if
patient continues to represent danger to self or others and multiple de-escalation
techniques are unsuccessful.

•  For placement of restraints, use only the minimum amount/type of restraint necessary

using the minimum amount of force.

•  NPO.

•  Use Oxygen as indicated.
•

If glucose <60, treat for hypoglycemia under Protocol 2.03 (Altered Mental Status).

Advanced Life Support (ALS) Treatment

•
If glucose <60, treat for hypoglycemia under Protocol 2.03 (Altered Mental Status).
•  For anxious, cooperative patients with a suspected psychiatric history experiencing

symptoms (e.g. auditory hallucinations) offer the patient Olanzapine ODT to self-administer
or have the paramedic assist in administering. If patient behavior escalates and becomes
violent, use Midazolam as second line agent after olanzapine.

•  For adults with severe agitation posing a danger to self: administer either

o  Droperidol IM OR
o  Midazolam IM

•  For adults with severe agitation posing a danger to self or others, administer Droperidol.  If

contraindication(s) to Droperidol are present, administer Midazolam.

•  All patients receiving a chemical restraint must have continuous cardiac, EtCO2, and pulse-

oximetry monitoring and have frequent reassessment OR documentation as to why
monitoring was limited AND other non-technological assessment options that were utilized
(e.g. airway, breathing, circulation)

•  Utilization of medication to treat agitation is a critical healthcare decision. The decision

shall be made by EMS personnel, not law enforcement.

Page 1 of 4

SAN FRANCISCO EMS AGENCY
Effective: 10/1/25
Supersedes: 04/01/25

6.01 AGITATED / VIOLENT PATIENT

Comments

•  Physical restraints must NOT be placed in such a way as to prevent evaluation of the

patient's medical status (e.g. airway, breathing, circulation), impede patient care, or harm
the patient. Circulation to extremities (distal restraints) should be evaluated frequently. If
handcuffs are applied by law enforcement, a law enforcement officer shall accompany the
patient in the ambulance.

•  Patients shall not be placed, restrained, or transported in a prone position. If patient is
prone upon arrival, patient shall be placed in a supine position upon assuming care.

•  For restraint procedures, see Policy 4043 (EMS Use of Physical Restraints).
•  A patient can be transported to a Receiving Facility for further assessment, even if the
patient refuses treatment by prehospital providers, if the patient is placed on a 5150
involuntary hold, meaning that, they are:

1.  a danger to self;
2.  a danger to others; and/or
3.  unable to provide for their basic personal needs for food, clothing, shelter, personal
safety, or necessary medical care due to a mental disorder, severe substance use
disorder, or both.

•  A patient on an LPS conservatorship may not have capacity to refuse medical treatment.
You must review the patient’s letters of conservatorship (i.e., Court Order) to determine
whether the patient lacks capacity to make decisions regarding psychiatric treatment,
routine medical care, or necessary/non-routine medical care. Emergent/life-saving
treatment may always be provided without consent from the decision-maker.

•  A patient on an LPS conservatorship cannot refuse transport to a Receiving Facility without
the approval of the conservator (Welfare and Institutions Code § 5358.5). Contact the
conservator in this situation.

•

•  Based on the totality of the circumstances and after de-escalation steps have failed or are
likely to imminently fail, should EMS personnel directly perceive or have a reasonable
perception that the patient may become or is already presenting as agitated, violent, or
could harm or injure personnel during a physical restraint procedure, EMS Personnel must
consider calling law enforcement if law enforcement is not already on scene.
If law enforcement officers are on standby, EMS Personnel shall clearly articulate to law
enforcement officers the threat, including, but not limited to, factors showing the patient is
passively or actively resisting restraints, exhibiting agitated or violent behavior, and is a
public safety risk.  Law enforcement officers will evaluate the situation and based on their
knowledge, skill, experience, training, and applicable policies and procedures, they will
determine to what extent, if any, they may assist EMS Personnel with applying restraints.
Base Hospital Contact Criteria

•  For additional Midazolam or Droperidol dosing for patient with continued agitation

Page 2 of 4

SAN FRANCISCO EMS AGENCY
Effective: 10/1/25
Supersedes: 04/01/25

6.01 AGITATED / VIOLENT PATIENT

Appendix A – ERASER Mnemonic

EMS providers shall be mindful of iatrogenic escalation, as defined as escalation of the
patient’s agitated state by EMS or healthcare personnel acting in ways that the patient does
not expect or desire (e.g. restricting a patient’s freedom to move (cornering the patient),
taking away a patient’s belongings, or invalidating, confronting, arguing with, or
intimidating a patient).

When feasible to do so, the ERASER mnemonic strategies may be utilized to minimize
patient agitation. This is not a comprehensive list for all purposes and is listed in no
particular order.

E

Eyeball the
patient

R

A

Respect the
patient’s
space

A single
member of
EMS
personnel
does the
talking and
builds
rapport

S

Sensible
listening

Evaluate the patient from a safe distance. Survey the scene and ask
about weapons or other features that make the scene unsafe. Decide if
law enforcement is necessary (if in doubt, err on the side of caution
and involve law enforcement). Are there signs that the patient will not
respond to verbal de-escalation?
Patient behavior may escalate when there is intrusion into their
personal space.
EMS personnel should maintain a respectful distance while being
aware of escape routes should the patient become violent.
Establishing rapport is critical. When multiple EMS personnel are on
the scene, a single individual should be charged with talking to the
patient. The EMS personnel charged with this task must remain
neutral, and avoid demonstrating anger, frustration, or fear. This
individual should:

•  State their name and position,
•  Offer to help.
•  Be genuine and honest.
•  Use a calm, reassuring, and helpful voice, and a neutral

expression.

•  Ask concise questions, and provide concise statements and

instructions.

•  Give the patient time to respond.

Patients want to be heard. Patients who are upset or confused often
want a way to resolve the issue. Try to understand what the patient
wants. Show a willingness to calmly listen to the patient, without
reacting to demands. If EMS personnel become reactive, angry,
frightened, or frustrated, this could result in the patient becoming re-

Page 3 of 4

SAN FRANCISCO EMS AGENCY
Effective: 10/1/25
Supersedes: 04/01/25

6.01 AGITATED / VIOLENT PATIENT

agitated and escalation. If this happens, other EMS personnel may
need to step in.
Set boundaries with the patient about behavior that will not be
tolerated, consequences of actions, and what the patient can expect.
Be clear. Avoid using language that can sound intimidating or
threatening.

•  Give specific instructions such as “can you please sit down so
we can talk?”, “can you put your bag down?”. Avoid generic
directives like “calm down” or “relax”.

•  Provide a clear direction about the need to ensure the safety of
the patient, EMS personnel and the public. Inform that restraint
or medications will be given as necessary, but as a last resort.
By retaining some degree of control, many patients will comply with
direction if given reasonable choices. For example, EMS personnel
could say, “would you like to walk over to the ambulance and sit on the
bed inside, or do you prefer we bring the gurney over here for you to
sit on?”

E

Establish
expectations
and set
boundaries

R

Reasonable
choices are
given to the
patient

Page 4 of 4

SAN FRANCISCO EMS AGENCY
Effective: 10/1/25
Supersedes: 04/01/25

