3.06 COLD INJURY/HYPOTHERMIA

BLS Treatment

•  Position of comfort.
•  NPO.
•  Oxygen as indicated.
•  Remove all wet clothing. Gently dry patient. Cover with blankets (warm if possible) to

prevent further heat loss.

•  Do active, external rewarming, using ready-heat chemical blankets.
•  Maintain warm environment.

•

IV/IO of Normal Saline at TKO.

ALS Treatment

Comments
•  Treat cardiac dysrhythmias according to protocol.
•  Severely hypothermic patients may need prolonged palpation/observation to detect pulse

and respirations.

•  Bradycardia is normal; very slow rates may be sufficient for metabolic demands.
•  Defibrillation may not be effective until patient is re-warmed.
•  Do NOT determine death for acutely hypothermic patient unless re-warmed or patient is

determined dead by other criteria.

•  Avoid heat packs with temperature > 110 degrees Fahrenheit that may burn patient’s skin.
•  Excessive movement of the patient may precipitate ventricular fibrillation. Use caution

while performing advanced airway management or when moving patient.

•  Hypothermic cardiac arrest patients with return of spontaneous circulation should not be

actively cooled. Keep patient covered and transport to STAR center.

•  Pale, cool, insensate extremities may be due to frostbite.
•  Frostbite: DO NOT rub or apply hot packs; manage affected extremities gently; keep

covered and avoid exposures that might cause thawing and re-freezing.

•  Cessation of resuscitation efforts in hypothermic patients

Base Hospital Contact Criteria

Page 1 of 1

SAN FRANCISCO EMS AGENCY
Effective: 03/01/15
Supersedes: 07/01/02

