SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY

MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

ADVISORY COMMITTEES

EFFECTIVE DATE: 10/1/25

               POLICY REFERENCE NO: 1010

  SUPERSEDES: 10/1/23

1.  PURPOSE

1.1.  To define the roles, structure, membership, and procedural standards for advisory

committees to the EMS Agency Medical Director.

2.  POLICY

2.1.  Advisory committees, composed of EMS system constituents, shall convene to review EMS
system issues relevant to their scope of responsibility and recommend actions to the EMS
Agency Medical Director concerning matters of policy, procedure, and protocol.

2.2.  The EMS Agency Medical Director, as mandated by state statute, provides medical oversight
and assures medical accountability throughout the planning, implementation and evaluation
of the EMS System.   The EMS Agency Medical Director retains the final decision through
his/her medical authority for the EMS system.

3.  OPEN PUBLIC MEETINGS

3.1.  All committee and sub-committee meetings are open to members of the public. Meeting

agendas, minutes, and other documents pertaining to these committees, except quality
improvement documents, are public records and subject to public review. The EMS Agency
shall distribute and post on its website an annual meeting schedule.

3.2.  The quality improvement portions of the EMS Advisory Committee and its sub-committees are
closed meetings because of confidential patient information reviewed during case discussions.

4.  PARLIAMENTARY AUTHORITY / QUORUM

4.1.  Proceedings of the advisory committee and subcommittees are conducted under the

“Robert’s Rules of Order” when they do not conflict with this policy. This policy shall take
precedence if any procedures are in conflict with “Robert’s Rules of Order.”

4.2.  A quorum is required to call the meeting to order and to transact committee business.  A

committee must maintain a quorum to continue a meeting.  Specific quorum requirements
are listed in Section 7.

5.  COMMITTEE MEMBERSHIP

5.1.  Committee members are nominated by their representative organization and appointed by

the EMS Agency Medical Director for a two-year term. Members may be re-appointed to their
position with concurrence of the EMS Agency Medical Director and their organization.
5.2.  Members who do not attend three meetings within a year may be replaced in their position

by the EMS Agency Medical Director.

1

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 1010

EFFECTIVE DATE:  10/1/25

6.  COMMITTEE OFFICERS

6.1.  Each committee shall elect a Chair and Vice-Chair. The Chair of each committee shall call and

preside over all meetings of that committee.  The Chair shall develop the committee agenda in
consultation with the EMS Agency Medical Director. The Vice-Chair shall assume the duties of
the Chair in their absence.

6.2.  Committee Chairs and Vice-Chairs serve a one-year term from July 1 – June 30.  At the last

meeting of each committee before July 1st, the members shall elect a Chair and Vice-Chair.
Chair and Vice Chair terms are effective at the first meeting of that committee after July 1st.
The committee may vote to extend their term once (for a total of two years of consecutive
service) if the current officers wish to continue.  Past officers are eligible for service again after
three (3) years from the end of their last term.

6.3.  This provision does not apply to the Trauma System Audit Sub-Committee, which has the
Trauma Medical Director at Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital (ZSFGH) as the
standing Chair.

6.4.  The EMS Agency will provide professional and clerical support to the advisory committees

created by this policy.

7.  STANDING ADVISORY COMMITTEE AND SUBCOMMITTEES

7.1.  Emergency Medical Services Committee (EMSAC): The standing advisory committee that is a
multi-disciplinary forum for reviewing and making recommendations related to the following:
7.1.1.  Prehospital clinical policies and treatment protocol issues involving First Responder,
Basic Life Support, Advanced Life Support, interfacility transport, and/or critical care
transport personnel in the San Francisco EMS system.

7.1.2.  General system management and operational policies including communications,

system performance, destination, ambulance diversion, and development of strategies
to optimize the EMS system.

7.1.3.  Disaster medical emergency management, including mitigation, preparedness,

response and recovery.

7.1.4.  Approval of prehospital pilot and research projects.
7.1.5.  Meetings: Held four (4) times per year or more frequently by request of the

Committee Chair, vote of the committee, or the request of the EMS Agency Medical
Director or his/her designee.

7.1.6.  Location: As set by agenda
7.1.7.  EMS Agency Staff: EMS Medical Director, EMS Director, EMS Agency Specialists
7.1.8.  Quorum: Consists of:

7.1.8.1.  33% of EMSAC membership
7.1.8.2.  At least one (1) ambulance provider agencies listed in Appendix A
7.1.8.3.  At least four (4) receiving facilities listed in Appendix C

7.1.9.  Membership consists of the EMS Agency Medical Director (ex-officio) and ne primary

representative and one alternate representative from:
7.1.9.1.  Ambulance provider agencies listed in Appendix A
7.1.9.2.  EMS Medical Directors of ambulance provider agencies listed in Appendix A
7.1.9.3.  Ambulance provider agencies listed in Appendix B
7.1.9.4.  City College of San Francisco – Paramedic Training Program

2

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 1010

EFFECTIVE DATE:  10/1/25

7.1.9.5.  City EMT
7.1.9.6.  Community Paramedicine representative (currently accredited in San

Francisco)

7.1.9.7.  Field EMT representative (currently certified in San Francisco and working for
a permitted ambulance company and appointed by the EMS Agency Medical
Director)

7.1.9.8.  Field Paramedic representative (currently accredited in San Francisco and
working for a permitted ambulance company and appointed by the EMS
Agency medical Director)

7.1.9.9.  Members of the public, not affiliated with a regulated provider organization,

and appointed by the EMS Agency Medical Director

7.1.9.10. San Francisco Department of Public Health (DPH)
7.1.9.11. San Francisco Division of Emergency Communications (DEC) Medical Director
7.1.9.12. San Francisco receiving facilities listed in Appendix C
7.1.9.13. ZSFGH Base Hospital Medical Director

7.1.10. EMSAC membership shall be in compliance with Community Paramedicine and Triage

to Alternate Destination program requirements (1797.273.) Should above membership
not meet or exceed these requirements, the EMS Agency Medical Director shall
appoint additional representatives:
7.1.10.1. Ambulance Provider Companies listed in Appendix A
7.1.10.2. San Francisco Receiving Hospitals listed in Appendix C
7.1.10.3. San Francisco Emergency Physicians’ Association
7.1.10.4. City College of San Francisco - Paramedic Training Program
7.1.10.5. San Francisco Department of Public Health
7.1.10.6. San Francisco General Hospital Base Hospital Medical Director
7.1.10.7. San Francisco Fire Department EMS Medical Director
7.1.10.8. San Francisco Emergency Communications Department Medical Director
7.1.10.9. Paramedic field representatives currently accredited in San Francisco and

working for a permitted ambulance company appointed by the EMS Agency
Medical Director

7.1.10.10.

EMT field representatives currently certified in San Francisco and working

on a permitted ambulance company appointed by the EMS Agency Medical
Director

7.1.10.11.  Members of the public, not affiliated with a regulated provider
organization, and appointed by the EMS Agency Medical Director.

7.2.  Trauma System Audit Subcommittee (TSAC): A standing subcommittee of the EMS Advisory

Committee that advises on trauma system policy. Its goals are the evaluation and
administration of the trauma system with oversight responsibility for system vulnerabilities,
the development of policy and/or approaches to related issues such as major trauma and
burn-related prehospital care, injury surveillance, trauma transfers, repatriation, and long-
term outcomes.
7.2.1.  Meetings: Two (2) times per year, or by request of the subcommittee Chair or the EMS

Agency Medical Director.

7.2.2.  Location: As set by agenda

3

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 1010

EFFECTIVE DATE:  10/1/25

7.2.3.  EMS Agency Staff: EMS Medical Director, EMS Director and Trauma Coordinator
7.2.4.  Quorum: Consists of:

7.2.4.1.  33% of TSAC membership
7.2.4.2.  One (1) representative from ZSFGH Trauma Center

7.2.5.  Membership consists of:

7.2.5.1.  EMS Agency Medical Director (ex-officio)
7.2.5.2.  ZSFGH Trauma Medical Director (ex-officio)
7.2.5.3.  ZSFGH  Trauma Program Manager (ex-officio)
7.2.5.4.  At least one (1) representative from UCSF Saint Francis Bothin Burn Center
7.2.5.5.  At least one (1) representative from each of the San Francisco receiving

facilities listed in Appendix C (including ZSFGH and UCSF Saint Francis)

7.2.5.6.  One (1) representative from each 9-1-1 ambulance provider
7.2.5.7.  One (1) member of the public not affiliated with a regulated stakeholder
organization, appointed by the EMS Agency Medical Director

7.2.5.8.  San Mateo County LEMSA Trauma Coordinator

7.3.  STAR Subcommittee: A standing subcommittee of the EMS Advisory Committee that advises
on STEMI and post-cardiac arrest prehospital care.  The subcommittee’s goals are the
evaluation of STEMI and cardiac arrest policies and protocols for the EMS system with the
responsibility for addressing system vulnerabilities. It assists the EMS Medical Director by
evaluating topics and data about related issues such as clinical research on prehospital STEMI
and cardiac arrest care, clinical outcomes, community education, interfacility transfers,
repatriation, and long-term outcomes.
7.3.1.  Meetings: Two (2) times per year by request of the subcommittee Chair or the EMS

Agency Medical Director.

7.3.2.  Location: As set by agenda.
7.3.3.  EMS Agency Staff: EMS Medical Director and STAR program coordinator.
7.3.4.  Quorum: Consists of:

7.3.4.1.  33%of STAR Subcommittee membership
7.3.4.2.  At least one (1) representative from a STAR-designated hospital

7.3.5.  Membership consists of:

7.3.5.1.  EMS Agency Medical Director (ex-officio)
7.3.5.2.   At least one (1) representative from each STAR-designated hospital
7.3.5.3.  One (1) representative from a non-STAR designated hospital
7.3.5.4.  At least one (1) representative from each 9-1-1 ambulance provider

(Appendix A)

7.4.  Stroke Subcommittee: A standing subcommittee of the EMS Advisory Committee that advises
on Stroke prehospital care.  The subcommittee’s goals are the evaluation of Stroke policies
and protocols for the EMS system with the responsibility for addressing system vulnerabilities.
It assists the EMS Medical Director by evaluating topics and data about related issues such as
clinical research on prehospital Stroke care, clinical outcomes, community education,
interfacility transfers, repatriation, and long-term outcomes.
7.4.1.  Meetings: Two (2) times per year by request of the subcommittee Chair or the EMS

Agency Medical Director.

7.4.2.  Location: As set by agenda.

4

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 1010

EFFECTIVE DATE:  10/1/25

7.4.3.  EMS Agency Staff: EMS Medical Director and Stroke program coordinator.
7.4.4.  Quorum: Consists of:

7.4.4.1.  33% of Stroke Subcommittee membership
7.4.4.2.  Representation from at least one (1) Stroke Center

7.4.5.  Membership consists of:

7.4.5.1.  EMS Agency Medical Director (ex-officio)
7.4.5.2.  At least one (1) representative from each Stroke Center
7.4.5.3.  At least one (1) representative from each 9-1-1 ambulance provider

(Appendix A)

7.5.  EMS For Children (EMS-C) Subcommittee: A standing subcommittee of the EMS Advisory
Committee that advises on pediatric prehospital care.  The subcommittee’s goals are the
evaluation of pediatric policies and protocols for the EMS system with the responsibility for
addressing system vulnerabilities. It assists the EMS Medical Director by evaluating topics and
data about related issues such as clinical research on prehospital pediatric care, clinical
outcomes, community education, interfacility transfers, repatriation, and long-term
outcomes.
7.5.1.  Meetings: Two (2) times per year by request of the subcommittee Chair or the EMS

Agency Medical Director.

7.5.2.  Location: As set by agenda.
7.5.3.  EMS Agency Staff: EMS Medical Director, Deputy Director of QI
7.5.4.  Quorum: Consists of:

7.5.4.1.  33% of EMS-C Subcommittee membership

7.5.5.  Representation from at least one (1) critical pediatric center Membership consists of:

7.5.5.1.  EMS Agency Medical Director (ex-officio)
7.5.5.2.  At least one (1) representative from each approved pediatric receiving

hospital

7.5.5.3.  At least one (1) representative from each 9-1-1 ambulance provider

(Appendix A)

7.6.  Quality Improvement (QI) Subcommittee: A standing subcommittee of the EMS Advisory

Committee that advises on system quality improvement issues. The subcommittee’s goal is to
report on and evaluate the EMS system and recommend any necessary changes.  It assists the
EMS Medical Director by evaluating topics and data about issues such as response capabilities,
system structure, clinical performance, clinical outcomes, and professional training.
7.6.1.  Meetings: Three (3) times per year by request of the subcommittee Chair or the EMS

Agency Medical Director

7.6.2.  Location: As set by agenda
7.6.3.  EMS Agency Staff: EMS Medical Director, Deputy Director of QI
7.6.4.  Quorum: Consists of 25% of QI Subcommittee membership: Consists of:

7.6.4.1.  EMS Agency Medical Director (ex-officio)
7.6.4.2.  Division of Emergency Communications (DEC)
7.6.4.3.  At least one (1) representative from each designated Receiving Facility in

Appendix C

7.6.4.4.  At least one (1) representative from ZSFGH Base Hospital
7.6.4.5.  At least one (1) representative from UCSF Saint Francis Bothin Burn Center

5

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 1010

EFFECTIVE DATE:  10/1/25

7.6.4.6.  At least one (1) representative from each ambulance provider in Appendix A

and B

7.6.4.7.  At least one (1) locally accredited Community Paramedic (CP)

8.  AUTHORITY

8.1.  California Health and Safety Code, Section 1797 et seq. and 1798 et seq.
8.2.  California Government Code, Section 54950 et seq.
8.3.  California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9
8.4.  City and County of San Francisco Administrative Code, Section 67.1 et seq.

APPENDIX A:  SAN FRANCISCO 9-1-1 AMBULANCE PROVIDERS

1.  American Medical Response (AMR)
2.  King American Ambulance
3.  San Francisco Fire Department (SFFD)

APPENDIX B: SAN FRANCISCO NON 9-1-1 AMBULANCE PROVIDERS

1.  NorCal Ambulance
2.  Pro-Transport 1
3.  Royal Ambulance

APPENDIX C:  SAN FRANCISCO RECEIVING FACILITIES
(* indicates Alternate Destination)

1.  California Pacific Medical Center (CPMC) – Bernal
2.  CPMC – Davies
3.  CPMC – Van Ness
4.  Chinese Hospital
5.  Geary Stabilization Unit (GSU)*
6.  Kaiser Permanente – San Francisco
7.  Kaiser Permanente – South San Francisco
8.  Seton Medical Center (San Mateo)
9.  San Francisco Sobering Center*
10. University of California, San Francisco (UCSF)  Mission Bay
11. UCSF Saint Francis  Hospital
12. UCSF Saint Mary’s Medical Center
13. UCSF – Parnassus
14. Veterans Administration (VA) Medical Center*
15. Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital (ZSFGH) Trauma Center & Base Hospital

6

