SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

Policy Reference Number:  1020
Effective Date:  January 1, 2011
Review Date:  January 1, 2013
Supersedes:  August 1, 2008

Term

800 MegaHertz (MHz)

ABC’s
Abbreviated Injury
Scale (AIS)

Acute Care Facility or
Acute Care Hospital
ACS
Advanced Cardiac Life
Support (ACLS)

Advanced Life Support
(ALS)

Medical Priority
Dispatch System
(MPDS)

Automated External
Defibrillator (AED)

Air Ambulance

ALS Contact

ALS First Response
Services

ALS Ground
Ambulance Services

GLOSSARY

Definition

The band of frequencies dedicated by the Federal Communications
Commission for local, district, and state government agencies. In this Policy
Manual, the term refers specifically to the radio system used by the City and
County of San Francisco.
Airway, Breathing, and Circulation
“Abbreviated Injury Scale” is an anatomic severity scoring system. For the
purposes of data sharing, the standard to be followed is AIS 90. For the
purpose of volume performance measurement auditing, the standard to be
followed is AIS 90, using AIS code derived or computer derived scoring.
A facility licensed by the State Department of Health Services as a general
acute care hospital.
Auxiliary Communications Service
A specific protocol or methodology for cardiac patients published by a
recognized panel or association of experts in the field of cardiology, such as
the American Heart Association’s ACLS guidelines.
Medical care in the treatment of prehospital or interfacility transport patients
as defined in Title 22 under Paramedic Scope of Practice. Also refers to the
capabilities of a crew configuration containing at least 1 EMT-P, a vehicle
equipped appropriately and staffed by at least 1 EMT-P, or an individual who
is a licensed EMT-P.
A proprietary emergency medical dispatch system owned by Medical Priority
Consultants, Inc©. It is a method of triaging and categorizing calls that is
required by the EMS Agency for permitted ambulance providers in San
Francisco.  Characteristics of this system include: systematized caller
interrogation questions, systematized pre-arrival instructions, and protocols
that match the dispatchers evaluation of injury or illness severity with vehicle
response mode and configuration (a.k.a., Clausen Method).
An external defibrillator capable of cardiac rhythm analysis which will charge
and, with or without further operator action, deliver a shock after
electronically detecting and assessing ventricular fibrillation or ventricular
tachycardia. These devices are known as semi or fully automatic
defibrillators.
Any aircraft specifically constructed, modified, or equipped, and used for the
primary purpose of responding to emergency medical calls and transporting
critically ill patients whose flight crew has, at a minimum, two attendants
certified or licensed to perform Advanced Life Support.
For the purposes of an EMT-P evaluation or remediation: any call in which
the candidate or intern provides ALS level intervention or assessment (except
cardiac monitoring) as the primary care provider from their arrival on scene
and throughout transport or other disposition of the patient.
The provision of ALS services provided in a non-patient-transporting vehicle
by an authorized ALS provider pursuant to a Paramedic Service Provider
MOU consistent with State law and EMS Agency policies and procedures.
The provision of ALS services provided in an ambulance by an authorized
ALS Provider pursuant to a EMT-P Service Provider MOU consistent with
State law and EMS Agency policies and procedures.

Page 1

Policy Reference Number:  1020
Effective Date: January 1, 2011

ALS Optional Scope of
Practice

ALS Provider

ALS Rescue Aircraft
Ambulance Permit

ARC
ARES
Authorizing EMS
Agency or authorizing
agency

Austere Care

Auxiliary
Communications Service
(ACS)
Auxiliary Rescue
Aircraft
AVL
Base Hospital (BH) or
Base Station

Base Hospital Physician
(BHP)

Basic Life Support
(BLS)

Bay Area Medical
Mutual Aid (BAMMA)

Bed Availability

ALS treatments, procedures, and/or pharmaceutical agents approved for local
optional scope of practice for EMT-Ps accredited by the San Francisco EMS
Agency and on duty with a San Francisco EMS Agency permitted ALS
Provider.
A public or private entity permitted to provide EMT-P response and/or
ambulance transportation within San Francisco in accordance with EMS
Agency policy and the entity’s Paramedic Service Provider MOU.
Rescue aircraft staffed with at least one ALS certified person.
A permit issued by the Director of Public Health for an ambulance or routine
medical transport vehicle pursuant to San Francisco Health Code, Article 14.
This permit is required to operate an ambulance or routine medical transport
vehicle within the City and County of San Francisco.
American Red Cross
Amateur Radio Emergency Service
The local EMS Agency which approves utilization of specific EMS providers,
policies, and procedures in accordance with local and State law. In San
Francisco, this authority is vested in the Department of Public Health, EMS
Agency.
Simple, life saving care that does not require unusual equipment, or excessive
use of time or personnel. Opening the airway by repositioning the head is
austere care; intubating a patient is not.
Volunteer organization attached to OES to provide HAM radio services
during critical incidents or large events.

A rescue aircraft which does not have a medical flight crew, or whose crew is
not qualified to perform medical services.
Automatic Vehicle Locator
A designated medical facility that provides on-line medical control for
EMT-Ps and consultation for various ALS activities under State EMT-P
Regulations.
A physician or surgeon who is currently licensed in California, who is
assigned to the emergency department of a Base Hospital, and who has been
trained to issue advice and instructions to EMT-Ps consistent with EMS
Agency policies and protocols, and the EMT-P scope of practice as defined in
State law.
Medical care in the treatment of prehospital or interfacility transport patients
as defined in Title 22 under EMT-1 Scope of Practice. Also refers to the
capabilities of a crew configuration containing at least one EMT-1, a vehicle
equipped appropriately and staffed by at least one EMT-1, or an individual
who is a certified EMT-1.
Refers to a loose affiliation of the counties of Alameda, Contra Costa, Marin,
Monterey, Napa, San Francisco, San Joaquin, San Mateo, Santa Clara, Santa
Cruz, Solano, and Sonoma for the purposes of medical mutual aid.
The number of staffed, in-patient beds available at a particular hospital.
Generally referred to in this Policy Manual with regards to MCI and disaster
capacity.

BLS Ground Ambulance  An ambulance staffed and equipped to provide basic life support in full

BLS Provider

compliance with State and local law, as well as EMS Agency policies and
procedures. Synonymous with “routine medical transport vehicle” for the
purposes of this Policy Manual.
A public or private entity permitted by San Francisco EMS Agency to provide
BLS services within San Francisco consistent with EMS Agency policies and
procedures, local, and State laws.

Page 2

Policy Reference Number:  1020
Effective Date: January 1, 2011

BLS Rescue Aircraft

A rescue aircraft whose medical flight crew has, at a minimum, one attendant
certified as an EMT-1 with at least 8 hours of hospital clinical training and
whose field/clinical experience specified in Section 10074(c) of Title 22,
California Code of Regulations, is in the aeromedical transport of patients.
Basic Trauma Life Support
Computer Aided Dispatch
The standardized EMS data and quality improvement system developed by
the California State EMS Authority.

BTLS
CAD
California EMS
Information System
(CEMSIS)
CARES
CHP
Classifying EMS Agency  The agency which categorizes EMS aircraft or other EMS response vehicles

California Amateur Radio Services
California Highway Patrol

Clinical Indicator
COBRA
Cold Zone

Command Staff

County Health Officer

CPAP
CPR
Critical Incident

Critical Incident Stress
Debriefing (CISD)
DCAP-BTLS

Deceased

Decontamination

Delayed (triage
category)
DPH
Department Operations
Center (DOC)

Designated EMS
Dispatch Center

Disrupted
Communications
Protocol
Division of Emergency
Communications  (DEC)

as necessary or required by law.
A measurable variable relating to the structure, process, or outcome of care.
Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act.
The area of a hazardous scene which is determined to be free of hazardous
materials.
Incident Command System positions including the Incident Commander,
Safety Officer, Liaison Officer, Public Information Officer, and any Medical /
Technical Specialists who serve as consultants guiding incident response
The local health officer appointed by a board of supervisors who is delegated
the responsibility for enforcement of public health laws and regulations. In
San Francisco, the Health Officer is the Director of Public Health.
Continuous Positive  Airway Pressure (Ventilation)
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
Synonymous for an incident producing multiple casualties or a disaster; can
be a Level I, II, or III critical incident.
An organized approach for personnel who have experienced stressful
situations to help prevent long term emotional trauma syndromes
A mnemonic that stands for: Deformity Contusion/Crepitus Abrasion
Puncture Bruising/Bleeding Tenderness Laceration Swelling
Absence of life signs; a triage category in which there are no signs of life or,
due to limited resources, the critical casualty has minimal chance of survival
(known previously as expectant category).
The process by which hazardous materials are removed from an exposed
person by the removal of the victim’s clothing and washing with a
neutralizing agent.
A triage category where treatment is required, but may be delayed without
significant risk to life or limb.
Department of Public Health
Refers to the operations center for city departments for disaster or emergency
operations. When referenced in this document, this refers specifically to the
DPH Department Operations Center which is responsible for coordinating
health and medical resources during times of disaster or emergency
operations.
An organization designated by the EMS Agency to receive requests for
medical assistance, and to coordinate and dispatch EMS resources to these
requests.
Protocols that delineate procedures an EMT-P can perform if base hospital
contact cannot be established.

The agency of the City and County of San Francisco responsible for the
operations of the 911 communication system including police, fire, and EMS
communications

Page 3

Policy Reference Number:  1020
Effective Date: January 1, 2011

Department of
Emergency Management
(DEM)
Emergency (Federal
Definition)

Emergency (State
Definition)

Emergency Alert System
(EAS)

Emergency Helispot

EMS
EMS Aircraft

Emergency Medical
Services Authority
(EMSA)

Emergency Medical
Dispatcher (EMD)

EMResource

Emergency Medical
Personnel
Emergency Medical
Dispatching
Emergency Medical
Dispatch Priority
Reference System

EMS Landing Site

EMS Medical Director

EMDAC

Agency responsible for the overall coordination of resources prior to, during,
and after an emergency or disaster.

Any hurricane, tornado, storm, high water, wind driven water, tidal wave,
tsunami, earthquake, volcanic eruption, landslide, mudslide, snowstorm,
drought, fire, explosion or other catastrophe in any part of the United States
which requires federal emergency assistance to supplement state and local
efforts to save lives and protect public health and safety or to avert or lessen
the threat of a major disaster.

A disaster situation or condition of extreme peril to life and/or property,
resulting from other than war or labor controversy, which is or is likely to be
beyond local capability to control without assistance from other political
entities.
System allows government officials to address all citizens at the same time.
The system works by “chain-broadcasting,” which means each FM radio
station picks up the signal, broadcasts it, and relays it to the next station. If
one station in the link is disabled, then the chain is broken.
A site at or near the scene of an emergency designated by the Incident
Commander as an appropriate place for landing and takeoff of helicopters.
Emergency Medical Services
Any aircraft utilized for the purpose of prehospital emergency patient
response and transport. EMS aircraft includes air ambulances and all
categories of rescue aircraft.
The state agency charged with coordinating the state emergency medical
response. The Authority will mobilize and coordinate medical services mutual
aid resources to mitigate health problems. It coordinates, through local
emergency management system agencies, medical hospital disaster
preparedness with other local, state, and federal agencies having a
responsibility relating to disaster response.
A public safety telecommunicator with additional specific training in
emergency medical dispatch practices and protocols essential for the efficient
management of emergency call taking and emergency medical dispatch
communications. All Emergency Medical Dispatchers are certified as an
EMD by the National Academy of Emergency Medical Dispatch.
A computer program that shows the status of all prehospital resources in the
City  of San Francisco
All public safety first responders, Emergency Medical Dispatchers, EMT-1s,
and EMT-Ps functioning within the emergency medical services system.
The reception, evaluation, and processing of requests for emergency medical
assistance and the dispatch of EMS resources.
A medially approved reference system used by a designated Emergency
Medical Dispatch Center to dispatch aid to medical emergencies. The
reference system includes: systematized caller interrogation questions,
systematized pre-arrival instructions, and protocols that match the
dispatcher’s evaluation of injury or illness severity with vehicle response
mode and configuration.
A site at or near a medical facility, a mass gathering, or a multi-casualty
incident which has been pre-selected and approved for the landing and taking
off of EMS aircraft, but not designed or used exclusively for helicopter flight
operations.
The Medical Director of the Department of Public Health EMS Agency,
fulfilling the responsibilities defined in California Health and Safety Code,
Section 1797.202.
Emergency Medical Services Directors Association of California

Page 4

Policy Reference Number:  1020
Effective Date: January 1, 2011

Emergency Medical
Services Agency
(EMSA)
Emergency Medical
Technician (EMT-1,
EMT-B)
EMSA Orientation
Course

EMS Agency Policies,
Procedures, and
Protocols
EMS System Quality
Indicators
Emergency Medical
Technician – Paramedic
(EMT-P)
Emergency Period

Emergency Policy

Emergency Public
Information (EPI)

Emergency Public
Information System

Emergency Operations
Center (EOC)
Emergency Operations
Plan (EOP)

Exclusive Operating
Area (EOA)

First Responders

FCC

Federal Emergency
Management Agency
(FEMA)
Finance Section
FTO
GPS Transmitter

Hazardous Material
(HAZMAT)
Hazard

The Agency of the San Francisco Department of Public Health that regulates
the EMS System in San Francisco and fulfills the role of the Local EMS
Agency as required by California Health and Safety Code.
A person trained in BLS and currently certified as an EMT-1 or EMT-1 Basic.
When used in this Policy Manual, it normally refers specifically to those
EMT-1s certified in California unless otherwise noted.
A program developed by the EMS Agency that describes the local EMS
System; providers are required to present the course to all newly hired
employees prior to their being released to working in the field either with a
field training officer or independently.
All policy, procedure, and protocol documents developed through the EMS
Agency policy development process.

Structure, process, or outcome variables that define quality of care in the EMS
System.
An EMT-1 or EMT-2 who has additional training in ALS and is licensed by
the State of California as an EMT-P or Paramedic.

A period which begins with the recognition of an existing, developing, or
impending situation that poses a potential threat to a community. It includes
the warning (where applicable) and impact phase and continues until
immediate and ensuing effects of the disaster no longer constitute a hazard to
life or threat to property.
A new or revised policy implemented by the EMS Medical Director to
remedy an immediate threat to public health and safety.
Information disseminated to the public by official sources during an
emergency, using broadcast and print media. Includes: Instructions on
survival and health preservation, status information on the disaster situation,
and other useful information.
The network of information officers and their staff who operate at all levels of
government within the State. The system also includes the news media
through which emergency information is released to the public.
The EOC serves as central command and control post for city government
during a disaster.
A plan for managing critical incidents. May refer to the San Francisco EOP,
which is a City wide plan developed and coordinated by OES or the DPH
EOP which is a plan specific to the medical, health, and EMS aspects of the
City and is maintained by the EMS Agency.
An EMS area or sub-area defined by the EMS Plan for which the EMS
Agency restricts operations to one or more providers of emergency ambulance
services and ALS services.
Prehospital personnel trained to the First Responder level of care as approved
by the EMS Agency.
Federal Communications Commission, a regulatory agency for broadcast
media
The agency charged with focusing federal efforts to lessen the impact of
emergencies before they occur and to respond to emergencies of all types.

Component of ICS designed to handle all financial aspects of the incident.
Field Training Officer
A device that transmits a location using the Global Positioning System to a
known receiver.
Chemicals or materials that pose the threat of illness or death via contact,
inhalation, or ingestion.
Any source of danger or element of risk

Page 5

Hazard Area

HAM
HEARNet

HIPPA

Hot Zone

Immediately Available

Implementation

Incident Action Plan

Incident Command
System (ICS)
Injury Severity Score

Inner Perimeter
Integrated Response
Plan (IRP)

Investigative Review
Panel (IRP)

IO
IV
Jurisdiction of Origin

Land line
LZ
Level I Disaster

Level II Disaster

Level III Disaster

Policy Reference Number:  1020
Effective Date: January 1, 2011

A geographically identifiable area in which a specific hazard presents a
potential threat to life and property.
Amateur radio operator
Hospital Emergency Administrative Radio Network. The VHF voice radio
used by hospitals, DEC, and the DPH DOC to communicate during disasters.
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 - legislation
regarding privacy of personal health information
The area of the EMS Scene which is considered to be contaminated with a
HAZMAT.
"Immediately" or "immediately available" means:
1.
2.
3.

unencumbered by conflicting duties or responsibilities;
responding without delay when notified; and
being physically available to the specified area of the trauma center
when the patient is delivered in accordance with EMS Agency policies
and procedures.

"Implementation" or "implemented" or "has implemented" means the
development and activation of a trauma care system plan by the EMS Agency,
including the actual triage, transport and treatment of trauma patients in
accordance with the plan.
A general plan prepared by the participant to provide responders with general
objectives for the management strategy of a critical incident.
A specific nationally recognized method of organizing and managing
incidents.
“Injury Severity Score” or “ISS” means the sum of the squares of the
Abbreviated Injury Scale score of the three most severely injured body
regions.
Perimeter surrounding an immediate hazard area
The plan, as described in policy, that provides for permitted ALS service
providers to coordinate with the DEC to provide additional ambulance
resources.
An impartial advisory body, the members of which are knowledgeable in the
provision of prehospital emergency medical care and local EMS system
policies and procedures, which may be convened to review allegations against
an applicant for, or the holder of, a certificate, assist in establishing the facts
of the case, and provide its findings and recommendations to the medical
director of a local EMS Agency, in accordance with the process described in
Section 100211 of the California Code of Regulations.
Intra-Osseous
Intravenous
The local EMS jurisdiction within which the authorized resource is located.
Usually referring to origin of air ambulances and rescue aircraft.
Public or private hardwired telephone communications system.
Land Zone for air medical assets
A moderate to severe incident where local resources are adequate and
available, either on duty or by call back. There are adequate local resources to
provide field medical triage and stabilization, and transport patients to an
appropriate local facility. Generally geographically limited without
interruption of command and control infrastructure.
A moderate to severe incident where resources are not adequate and multi-
jurisdictional/regional mutual aid may be required due to a large number of
casualties and/or a lack of local healthcare facilities. A local emergency will
be proclaimed and a State of Emergency might be proclaimed. Generally
categorized as a City-wide disaster without interruption of command and
control infrastructure.
A major disaster where local and regional resources in or near the impacted

Page 6

Local EMS Information
System (LEMSIS)

Logistics (LOGS)

Mass Casualties

Mass Gathering

Material Change

Medical Control

Medical Emergency

Medical Mutual Aid

Medical Mutual Aid
Threshold Situation
(MMATS)
Minor

Minor revision

Multi-Casualty Incident
(MCI)

MCI Plan

MCI Polling
MHOAC
On-Call

Operations Section
(Ops)

Policy Reference Number:  1020
Effective Date: January 1, 2011

areas are overwhelmed and extensive outside mutual aid is required. A State
of Emergency will be proclaimed and a Presidential Declaration of an
Emergency or Major Disaster will be requested. Citywide or regional disaster
with multiple sites and interrupted command and control infrastructure.
A database of defined data elements from dispatch, prehospital and hospital
provider data collection records used to define the EMS System quality
indicators.
Component of ICS which provides all support and service needs to the
incident. All requests for assets, whether internal or external, are directed to
this Section. Logistics consists of personnel, supplies and equipment,
communications, and facilities management.
In the event of an emergency with a large number of casualties, the volume of
casualties and the disaster environment may create barriers to care and delay
transport of the most seriously injured.
A mass gathering is a large group of people that have medical care of some
type available on scene due to the size or nature of the gathering. This medical
care may be provided by a variety of health care professionals to include
EMT-Ps and EMT-1s. Mass gatherings may occur in permanent or temporary
venues.
A material change is any change in policy other than a minor revision.
Material change specifically includes new policy or policy changes that create
a significant expense to a provider, substantially changes the scope of
practice, or substantially changes the function, direction, or operation of the
EMS System.
The medical management of the EMS System pursuant to the provisions of
the California Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, Chapter 5.
The term used to denote a condition or situation in which an individual has a
need for immediate medical attention, or where the potential for such need is
perceived by public safety personnel or emergency medical personnel at the
scene of an emergency or dispatch personnel at a designated EMS dispatch
center.
An agreement by 2 or more counties to provide medical resources, services,
and facilities to each other as emergency assistance.
A situation where the EMS system is unable to timely meet demand for
services, as determined by the EMS Agency Medical Director or Director of
Health or their respective designees.
1. [context of disaster or MCI management]Triage category indicating
treatment may be delayed with little risk to life or limb. 2. [context of medical
legal, AMA, refusal of service] a person who has not reached the age of
consent and is otherwise ineligible for the right of self determination.
A minor revision to EMSA Policy is one which makes minor corrections
without affecting the status quo of the policy or makes changes that
implement mandatory changes federal, state, or local law or regulation.
Any incident which generates a large number of medical casualties – injuries
or illnesses – that cannot be treated by the initial EMS response. The incident
can be as few as 2 patients, but would normally involve at least 6 patients.
The procedure followed per EMS Agency Policy in the event that a multi-
casualty incident is declared.
Polling performed by the DEC to determine bed availability of local hospitals
Medical Health Operations Area Coordinator
"On-call" means agreeing to be available to respond to the trauma center in
order to provide a defined service.
Component of ICS responsible for the direct management of all incident
tactical activities. Staff assists in the formulation of the incident action plan
and oversees activities for the Public Health and Casualty Care Branches of

Page 7

Outer Perimeter
PALS
PAPRs

Paramedic
Paramedic Intern

Paramedic Field
Supervisor

Paramedic
Preceptor/Evaluator

Policy Reference Number:  1020
Effective Date: January 1, 2011

DPH Command.
Entire operational area of an incident.
Pediatric Advanced Life Support

Powered Air Purifying Respirators. The equipment is battery operated,
consists of a half or full face piece, breathing tube, battery-operated blower,
and particulate filters (HEPA only).

A person licensed by the California State EMS Authority as an EMT-P
A person enrolled in an authorized EMT-P education program who has
completed sufficient didactic hours to begin working in a hospital or field
clinical setting under the direct supervision of an assigned EMT-P or nurse
preceptor and who is allowed to utilize ALS skills and administer approved
medications while working as an intern and under the direct supervision of a
preceptor. EMT-P interns may not utilize ALS skills or administer
medications while not engaged or an approved education activity in an
approved clinical setting under the direct supervision of a nurse or EMT-P
preceptor.
An individual who meets all criteria required by EMS Agency policy, who is
directly responsible for providing supervision to EMT-Ps and EMT-1s. An
EMT-P field supervisor may operate within the guidelines established by
EMS Agency and provider policy, but may not supplant required medical
control through a Base Station Physician or authorize or instruct other
EMT-Ps to deviate from EMS Agency Policies and Protocols.
An EMT-P approved by the EMS Agency and permitted ALS provider in
accordance with State Law and EMS Agency policy to instruct EMT-P interns
in a field clinical setting and evaluate accreditation candidates during the pre-
accreditation evaluation.
Pediatric Education for Prehospital Professionals

PCI (Percutaneous
Coronary Infusion)
Plans Section

PEPP
Permitted ALS Provider  A publicly or privately owned or operated entity that is permitted by the SF
EMS Agency to provide ALS services in accordance with State Law, Local
Ordinance, and EMS Agency Policy.
Percutaneous Coronary Infusion: A broad group percutaneous techniques
utilized for the diagnosis and treatment of patients with STEMI
Component of ICS responsible for maintaining current situation status, and
preparation and documentation of the incident action plans. Coordinates
closely with the other sections of ICS. Planning disseminates information
regarding the incident to all sections and maintains the status of resources
assigned to incident activities.
Prehospital Trauma Life Support

PHTLS
Permitted BLS Provider  A publicly or privately owned or operated entity that is permitted by the SF

EMS Agency to provide BLS services, including non-emergency medical
transportation, in accordance with State Law, Local Ordinance, and EMS
Agency Policy.

Prehospital personnel

Pre-Arrival Instructions  Medically approved scripted instructions given by certified EMDs to callers
for providing necessary assistance and control of a medical emergency prior
to arrival of emergency medical personnel.
Emergency medical personnel including first responders, EMT-Is, and
EMT-Ps who responds to calls while on duty and provide care in the out-of-
hospital setting.
A request for emergency medical services that would be properly categorized
by the dispatch call taker using MPDS protocols as Charlie, Delta, or Echo
response.
The location where a 911 call is first answered.

Presumptively Defined
Life Threatening
Emergency
Primary Public Safety
Answering Point (PSAP)

Page 8

Promptly Available

Public Access
Defibrillation (PAD)

PAD: Prescribing
Physician

PAD: Enabling Agency

PAD: Internal
emergency response
system

Public Information
Officer (PIO)
Public Safety Helipad

Qualified Specialist

Rapid Trauma
Assessment
Receiving Hospital

Record of Calls

Red Alert

Residency Program

Rescue Aircraft

Response codes

Policy Reference Number:  1020
Effective Date: January 1, 2011

"Promptly" or "promptly available" means:
1.  responding without delay when notified and requested to respond to the
hospital; and
2.  being physically available to the specified area of the trauma center within
a period of time that is medically prudent and in accordance with EMS
Agency policies and procedures.
A program enabling lay persons rescuers to use an AED to treat patients in
cardiac arrest.

A physician or surgeon licensed in California who issues a written order for
the use of an AED by authorized individual(s), and who develops,
implements, and maintains the medical control provisions specified in State
Law and EMS Agency Policy.
The agency, organization, or company that sponsors a PAD program and
allows an AED on their premises.
A plan of action which utilizes responders within a facility to activate the 911
emergency response system, and which provides for the access, coordination,
and management of immediate medical care to seriously ill or injured
individuals.
An official responsible for releasing information to the public through the
news media.
A heliport that has been approved and permitted by the California Department
of Transportation (DOT) for the landing and takeoff of EMS and other public
safety aircraft and is designed for helicopter flight operations.
"Qualified specialist" or "qualified surgical specialist" or "qualified non-
surgical specialist" means a physician licensed in California who is board
certified in a specialty by the American Board of Medical Specialties, the
Advisory Board for Osteopathic Specialties, a Canadian board or other
appropriate foreign specialty board as determined by the American Board of
Medical Specialties for that specialty.
Using DCAP-BTLS is very rapid assessment of the patient from head to toe
without getting into the specifics of a detailed physical examination.
"Receiving hospital" means a licensed general acute care hospital with a
special permit for basic or comprehensive emergency service, which has not
been designated as a trauma center according to Title 22, Division 9, Chapter
7, but which has been formally assigned a role in the trauma care system by
the EMS Agency.
A record of calls as required in 13 CCR 1100.7 which includes a record of
each call be maintained for a minimum of 3 years and that includes specific
information listed in the statute.
An alert issued by the DEC indicating that a critical incident has occurred
producing causalities confirmed by the Incident Commander.
"Residency program" means a residency program of the trauma center or a
residency program formally affiliated with a trauma center where senior
residents can participate in educational rotations, which has been approved by
the appropriate Residency Review Committee of the Accreditation Council on
Graduate Medical Education.
An aircraft whose usual function is not prehospital emergency transport, but
which may be utilized in compliance with EMS Agency policy, for
prehospital emergency patient transport when the use of an air or ground
ambulance is inappropriate or unavailable. Rescue aircraft includes ALS
rescue aircraft, BLS rescue aircraft, and auxiliary rescue aircraft.
The dispatch term which denotes the level of priority for units responding to
the scene:

•  Code 2: a non-life threatening medical emergency requiring

Page 9

Policy Reference Number:  1020
Effective Date: January 1, 2011

immediate response without the use of red lights or siren.
•  Code 3: a medical emergency requiring immediate response

with red lights and siren.

Reporting party

RIMS

911 caller - the person calling 911 or otherwise making a report of a situation
and/or requesting a response from a PSAP.
Resource Information Management System

Routine Medical Care

Routine Medical
Transport Vehicle

Search and Rescue
(SAR)

Self Help

Senior Resident

Service Area

Simple Triage and
Rapid Treatment
(START)
Staging Area
Standard Emergency
Management System
(SEMS)

Standard of Care

Standard Operating
Procedures (SOP)
Standing Orders

Special Circumstances

STEMI

STEMI) Receiving

A group of standard assessments and treatments, including but not limited to
the airway, breathing, and circulation, and the use of routine monitoring
devices.
A vehicle specifically constructed, modified, equipped, or arranged to
accommodate a stretcher and operated commercially for the purpose of
transporting sick, injured, convalescent, infirm, or otherwise incapacitated
persons not requiring urgent transportation, as further defined in the San
Francisco Health Code, Article 14. For the purposes of EMS System policies,
this term is synonymous with BLS ambulance, requiring the same staffing and
equipment and constrained by the same limitations regarding response, patient
transport, and utilization.
Systematic investigation of an area or premises to determine the presence
and/or location of persons entrapped, injured, immobilized, or missing, and
the removal of the persons for transportation to appropriate medical care.
A concept describing self-reliance and self-sufficiency within an adverse
environment with limited or no external assistance.
"Senior resident" or "senior level resident" means a physician, licensed in the
State of California, who has completed at least 3 years of residency or is in
their last year of residency training and has the capability of initiating
treatment and who is in training as a member of the residency program as
defined in these standards, at the designated trauma center.
"Service area" or “catchment area” means that geographic area defined by the
EMS Agency in its trauma care system plan as the area served by a designated
trauma center.
Field triage that allows field care personnel to triage patients into one of 4
categories within 60 seconds.

A receiving area for staff, patients, or supplies.
The State mandated system for disaster management utilizing the principles of
the Incident Command System applied to all levels of emergency response
agencies and government to provide a uniform and standard organizational
structure and guidance for operations to mitigate major incidents.
The usual, reasonable level of care to be rendered to patients. This level of
care varies from community to community, but should be a constant standard
for all patients from all providers in any given community.
A set of instructions having the force of a directive, covering those features of
operations which lend themselves to a definite or standardized procedure.
Certain medical procedures (refer to EMS Agency Adult and Pediatric
Treatment Protocols) determined by the EMS Agency Medical Director that
may be done without contacting the Base Hospital or during radio
communications failure.
Events, incidents, or patient conditions for which the most effective clinical
care may require prehospital personnel to deviate from the “Standard EMS
Treatment Protocols.”
ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction. A significant 12 lead EKG change.  A
significant 12 lead EKG change is defined as ST elevation greater than 2mm,
one small box, in anatomically contiguous leads
A hospital licensed for cardiac catheterization laboratory by the State

Page 10

Centers (SRC) (In
Development)

Supportive Care

Trauma Care System

Trauma Center

Policy Reference Number:  1020
Effective Date: January 1, 2011

Department of Health Services and approved as a SRC by the San Francisco
EMS Agency. With the initiation of 12 lead EKGs by paramedics and rapid
transport to a STEMI  Receiving Center with 24-hour cardiac catheterization
laboratories and cardiovascular surgery capabilities, patients with STEMI will
receive definitive care
Basic Life Support and Advanced Life Support procedures designed to reduce
pain and suffering, provide safety, alleviate discomfort and maintain the
patient’s dignity. Supportive care consists of, but is not limited to, BLS
airway maneuvers, removal of airway obstructions, oxygen administration,
hemorrhage control, hydration, glucose administration, and pain control.
"Trauma care system" or "trauma system" or "inclusive trauma care system"
means a system that is designed to meet the needs of all injured patients.
"Trauma Center" or "designated trauma center" means a licensed hospital,
accredited by the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare
Organizations, which has been designated as a Level I, II, III, or IV trauma
center and/or Level I or II pediatric trauma center by the EMS Agency, in
accordance EMS Agency Policy #5013, Trauma Center Designation..

Trauma Center Criteria  A method for deciding which patients need a trauma center, based on the

Trauma Override

Trauma Resuscitation
Area
Trauma Service

Trauma Team

Triage

Triage Criteria

Triage Tags

Unstable Patients

patient’s injuries, vital signs, mechanism of injury, and the paramedic’s
judgment.
SFGH continues Total Diversion during a period of Total Diversion
Suspension. They continue to divert medical patients, but accept trauma
patients.
"Trauma Resuscitation Area" means a designated area within a trauma center
where trauma patients are evaluated upon arrival.
A “trauma service” is a clinical service established by the organized medical
staff of a trauma center that has oversight and responsibility of the care of the
trauma patient. It includes, but is not limited to; direct patient care services,
administration, and as needed, support functions to provide medical care to
injured persons.
"Trauma team" means the multi-disciplinary group of personnel who have
been designated to collectively render care for trauma patients at a designated
trauma center. The trauma team consists of physicians, nurses and allied
health personnel. The composition of the trauma team may vary in
relationship to trauma center designation level and severity of injury which
leads to trauma team activation.
Literally means, “to sort:” commonly means prioritizing patients into
categories according to the severity of their condition. Patients requiring life
saving care are treated before those requiring only first aid (see START).
"Triage criteria" means a measure or method of assessing the severity of a
person's injuries that is used for patient evaluation and that utilizes anatomic
or physiologic considerations or mechanism of injury.
A tag used by triage workers as a patient chart to identify the patient and
document the patient’s care and condition.
Defined as those with any of the following:
•  Cardiac or respiratory arrest
•  Unstable airway
•  Respiratory distress (<10 or >29 breaths per minute) with acute altered

mental status

•  Shock as defined as blood pressure <80 systolic and pulse rate >120 with

poor skin signs (cool, pale, diaphoretic)

•  Status seizures
•  Obstetric emergencies: third trimester bleeding, prolapsed or nuchal cord,

imminent breech delivery

•  Trauma patients with any of the above, or who is unconscious, or with

Page 11

Policy Reference Number:  1020
Effective Date: January 1, 2011

uncontrolled bleeding

Weapons of Mass
Destruction (WMD)

Yellow Alert

Includes any chemical, radiological, nuclear, incendiary, explosive, or
biological agent used in terrorist activities to threaten or inflict intentional
harm or death to a given population.
Official status used by DEC indicating that a potential critical incident has
occurred which may result in casualties confirmed by first responders.

Page 12

