SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY

MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

PREHOSPITAL PERSONNEL STANDARDS & SCOPE OF PRACTICE

EFFECTIVE DATE: 10/1/25

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 2000

SUPERSEDES: 4/1/24

1.  PURPOSE

1.1.  Define the scope of local practice and standards for prehospital personnel

2.  POLICY

2.1.  All prehospital personnel shall operate within the scope of practice applicable to their level of
certification or licensure. Personnel shall not exceed their scope of practice as defined in State
law and San Francisco EMS Policy and Protocol.

2.2.  This policy applies to all prehospital personnel employed by, and on duty with, a permitted San

Francisco ALS or BLS provider.
2.2.1.  A paramedic must be employed with an approved paramedic service provider in order

to perform the scope of practice as specified in this policy.

2.2.2.  Paramedics not accredited in San Francisco, but employed as BLS personnel may not
utilize any part of the Paramedic Scope of Practice as defined in this policy.
2.2.3.  Accreditation candidates may utilize the Paramedic Basic Scope of Practice when

working with a second accredited Paramedic prior to receiving their accreditation.

2.3.  San Francisco EMS personnel responding into, or transporting through, another jurisdiction,

shall continue to operate under San Francisco policies and protocols including the local Scope
of Practice as defined in this policy.

2.4.  The requirements and process for EMT certification in San Francisco is described in Policy 2040

Emergency Medical Technician Certification.

2.5.  The requirements and process for paramedic accreditation in San Francisco is described in

Policy 2050 Paramedic Accreditation.

3.  EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN: LOCAL SCOPE OF PRACTICE

3.1.  During training, while at the scene of an emergency, during transport of the sick or injured, or
during an interfacility transfer, a certified EMT or supervised EMT student is authorized to do
any of the following:
3.1.1.  Evaluate the ill and injured.
3.1.2.  Render basic life support, rescue and emergency medical care to patients.
3.1.3.  Obtain diagnostic signs to include, but not be limited to, temperature, blood pressure,

pulse and respiration rates, pulse oximetry, level of consciousness, pupil status (and
blood glucose level if authorized by EMS Agency Medical Director).

1

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 2000

EFFECTIVE DATE: 10/1/25

3.1.4.  Perform cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), including the use of mechanical adjuncts

to basic cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
3.1.5.  Perform Automated External Defibrillation (AED).
3.1.6.  Administer oxygen.
3.1.7.  Remove a directly visualized foreign body from the airway.
3.1.8.  Use the following adjunctive airway and breathing aids:

3.1.8.1.  Oropharyngeal airway;
3.1.8.2.  Nasopharyngeal airway;
3.1.8.3.  Suction devices;
3.1.8.4.  Basic oxygen delivery devices for supplemental oxygen therapy including

humidifiers, partial rebreathers, and venturi masks;

3.1.8.5.  Manual and mechanical ventilating devices designed for prehospital use

including continuous positive airway pressure.

3.1.9.  Use various types of stretchers and spinal immobilization devices.
3.1.10. Provide initial prehospital emergency care of trauma, including:

3.1.10.1. Bleeding control through the application of tourniquets;
3.1.10.2. Use of approved hemostatic dressings from a list approved by the state EMS

Authority;

3.1.10.3. Spinal motion restriction or immobilization;
3.1.10.4. Seated spinal motion restriction or immobilization
3.1.10.5. Extremity splinting; and
3.1.10.6. Traction splinting.

3.1.11. Administer the following approved over the counter medications:

3.1.11.1. Oral glucose or sugar solutions; and
3.1.11.2. Aspirin (if approved by EMS Agency Medical Director).

3.1.12. Extricate entrapped persons.
3.1.13. Perform field triage.
3.1.14. Transport patients.
3.1.15. Apply mechanical patient restraint.
3.1.16. Set up for ALS procedures, under the direction of a Paramedic.
3.1.17. Administration of naloxone intranasally for altered mental status, respiratory

depression and/ or suspected opioid overdose, if authorized by Provider Medical
Director.

3.1.18. Administration of intramuscular epinephrine by auto-injector or draw-up method for

suspected anaphylaxis and/or severe asthma, if authorized by EMS Agency Medical
Director.

3.1.19. Assist patients with the administration of physician-prescribed devices including, but
not limited to, patient-operated medication pumps, sublingual nitroglycerin, and self-
administered emergency medications, including epinephrine devices.

2

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 2000

EFFECTIVE DATE: 10/1/25

4.  EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN: LOCAL SCOPE OF PRACTICE FOR INTERFACILITY TRANSFERS

4.1.  EMTs, during an interfacility transfer, may do the following:

4.1.1.  Monitor, maintain, and adjust if necessary in order to maintain a preset rate of flow

and turn off the flow of intravenous fluid:
4.1.1.1.  Glucose solutions including Dextrose 10%;
4.1.1.2.  Isotonic balanced salt solutions including Normal Saline and Ringer's lactate.
4.1.2.  Solutions may NOT be controlled by a mechanical IV pump or flow control device. Dial-

a-flow and similar aperture or constriction flow control devices may be monitored.
4.1.3.  EMTs may NOT monitor any fluid or medication infusion delivered through a central
venous access device unless delivered by means of a patient-controlled pump.
4.1.4.  Monitor a patient, who is deemed appropriate for transfer by the transferring

physician, and who has the following:
4.1.4.1.  Nasogastric (NG) tubes,
4.1.4.2.  Gastrostomy tubes,
4.1.4.3.  Heparin or saline locks,
4.1.4.4.  Foley catheters,
4.1.4.5.  Tracheostomy tubes,
4.1.4.6.  Indwelling vascular access lines.
4.1.4.7.  Patients with arterial lines MAY NOT be monitored by EMT’s.

4.1.5.  Tracheostomy patients and suctioning: Patients must be able to breathe without

mechanical assistance. Suctioning by EMTs is limited to inserting a soft suction catheter
to clear secretions from the proximal end of the tracheostomy tube. EMTs may not
perform deep tracheal suctioning or sterile suctioning. In no case, should the suction
catheter pass beyond the distal end of the tracheostomy tube.

5.  EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN: TRAINING STANDARDS

5.1.  EMTs will complete and maintain current certifications in Basic Life Support CPR
5.2.  All EMTs will complete a local orientation approved by EMS Agency that includes, at a

minimum:
5.2.1.  San Francisco EMS System organization
5.2.2.  San Francisco EMS Policies and Patient Treatment Protocols
5.2.3.  San Francisco EMS Agency MCI Plan
5.2.4.  San Francisco geography
5.2.5.  ICS-100 and ICS-200 (Basic ICS).
5.2.6.  FEMA IS-700a (Introduction to National Incident Management System).
5.2.7.  Hazmat First Responder Awareness course (FRA) per 29 CFR 1910-120.

6.  EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN: REQUIRED TRAINING FOR INDEPENDENT WORK

ASSIGNMENT ON AN ALS AMBULANCE
6.1.  EMT eligibility for independent work assignment is determined by their passing an advanced

life support (ALS) partner training approved by their EMS Provider Medical Director. If they

3

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 2000

EFFECTIVE DATE: 10/1/25

have not passed such a course, they may work as a primary EMT on a BLS response vehicle, or
as an EMT partnered with another EMT on a BLS ambulance. If they have passed such a
course, they may work as an EMT on an ALS ambulance with any San Francisco accredited
paramedic.

7.  PARAMEDIC: LOCAL SCOPE OF PRACTICE

7.1.  A paramedic may perform any activity identified in the EMT local scope of practice in Sections

3 and 4 of this policy.

7.2.  During training, while at the scene of a medical emergency, during transport of the sick or

injured, or during an interfacility transfer, an accredited Paramedic or a supervised Paramedic
accreditation candidate or a supervised Paramedic student is authorized to do any of the
following:
7.2.1.  Utilize electrocardiographic devices and monitor electrocardiograms, including 12- lead

electrocardiograms (ECG).

7.2.2.  Perform defibrillation, synchronized cardioversion, and external cardiac pacing.
7.2.3.  Visualize the airway by use of the laryngoscope and remove foreign bodies with Magill

forceps.

7.2.4.  Perform pulmonary ventilation by use of:

7.2.4.1.  Approved supraglottic airways (e.g. i-Gel)
7.2.4.2.  Stomal intubation,
7.2.4.3.  Adult oral endotracheal intubation (via direct or video laryngoscope).

7.2.5.  Perform trachea-bronchial suctioning of an intubated patient
7.2.6.  Utilize mechanical ventilation devices for continuous positive airway pressure

(CPAP)/bi-level positive airway pressure (BiPAP) and positive end expiratory pressure
(PEEP) in the spontaneously breathing patient.

7.2.7.  Institute intravenous (IV) catheters, saline locks, needles, or other cannulae (IV lines),

in peripheral veins and monitor and administer medications through pre- existing
vascular access.

7.2.8.  Institute intraosseous (IO) needles or catheters.
7.2.9.  Administer IV or IO glucose solutions or isotonic balanced salt solutions, including

normal saline and Ringer's lactate solution.

7.2.10. Obtain venous blood samples.
7.2.11. Use laboratory devices, including point of care testing, for pre-hospital screening to

measure the following lab values: glucose, capnometry, capnography, and carbon
monoxide when appropriate authorization is obtained from State and Federal agencies,
including from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services pursuant to the Clinical
Laboratory Improvement Amendments (CLIA).

7.2.12. Utilize Valsalva maneuver.
7.2.13. Perform percutaneous needle cricothyroidotomy.
7.2.14. Perform needle thoracostomy.
7.2.15. Perform nasogastric and orogastric tube insertion and suction.

4

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 2000

EFFECTIVE DATE: 10/1/25

7.2.16. Monitor thoracostomy tubes.
7.2.17. Monitor and adjust IV solutions containing potassium, equal to or less than 40 mEq/L.
7.2.18. Administer approved medications by the following routes: IV, IO, intramuscular,

subcutaneous, inhalation, transcutaneous, rectal, sublingual, endotracheal, intranasal,
oral or topical.

7.2.19. Administer the following medications:
7.2.19.1.        10%, 25%, 50% Dextrose;
7.2.19.2.        Activated Charcoal;
7.2.19.3.        Adenosine;
7.2.19.4.        Aerosolized or nebulized beta-2 specific bronchodilators;
7.2.19.5.        Amiodarone;
7.2.19.6.        Aspirin;
7.2.19.7.        Atropine Sulfate;
7.2.19.8.        Pralidoxime (2-PAM) Chloride;
7.2.19.9.        Calcium Chloride;
7.2.19.10.  Diazepam;
7.2.19.11.  Diphenhydramine Hydrochloride;
7.2.19.12.  Dopamine Hydrochloride;
7.2.19.13.
Epinephrine;
7.2.19.14.
Fentanyl
7.2.19.15.  Glucagon;
7.2.19.16.  Ketamine;
7.2.19.17.  Ketorolac;
7.2.19.18.
7.2.19.19.
7.2.19.20.  Magnesium Sulfate;
7.2.19.21.  Midazolam;
7.2.19.22.  Morphine Sulfate;
7.2.19.23.  Naloxone Hydrochloride;
7.2.19.24.  Nitroglycerine preparations, except IV, unless certified as a Critical Care

Lidocaine Hydrochloride;
Lorazepam

Paramedic

7.2.19.25.  Ondansetron;
7.2.19.26.

Sodium Bicarbonate;

8.  PARAMEDIC: LOCAL OPTIONAL SCOPE

8.1.  The EMS Agency Medical Director may apply for a Local Optional Scope of Practice (LOSOP).

The following LOSOPs are approved for Paramedic use by Accreditation Subtypes:
8.1.1.  ALS Local Accreditation

8.1.1.1.  Buprenorphine
8.1.1.2.  Supraglottic Airway (i-Gel) for pediatrics
8.1.1.3.  Hydroxocobalamin

5

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 2000

EFFECTIVE DATE: 10/1/25

8.1.1.4.  COVID-19 Testing (in the setting of a 911 call ONLY)
8.1.1.5.  Olanzapine
8.1.1.6.  Droperidol

8.1.2.  Critical Care Paramedic Endorsement

8.1.2.1.  Calcium Channel Blockers and Fluid Management

9.  CRITICAL CARE PARAMEDIC SCOPE OF PRACTICE

9.1.  A licensed and accredited paramedic may practice as a Critical Care Paramedic after

completing the following:
9.1.1.  Successful completion of a Critical Care Paramedic (CCP) training program as specified

in California Code of Regulations Section 100092.01

9.1.2.  Successful completion of Critical Care Paramedic competency testing.
9.1.3.  Holds a current certification as a Critical Care Paramedic from the Board for Critical

Care Transport Paramedic

9.1.4.  Obtain Critical Care Paramedic endorsement under Section 12 in the Bay Area Critical

Care Paramedic Program Standards

9.2.  In addition to the approved paramedic scope of practice, the Critical Care Paramedic may

perform the following procedures and administer medications during interfacility transports
(upon approval by the EMS Agency Medical Director):
9.2.1.  Set up and maintain thoracic drainage systems;
9.2.2.  Set up and maintain mechanical ventilators;
9.2.3.  Set up and maintain IV fluid delivery pumps and devices;
9.2.4.  Blood and blood products;
9.2.5.  Glycoprotein IIB/IIIA inhibitors;
9.2.6.  Heparin IV;
9.2.7.  Nitroglycerin IV;
9.2.8.  Norepinephrine;
9.2.9.  Thrombolytic agents and
9.2.10. Maintain total parenteral nutrition.

10. AUTHORITY

10.1. California Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, §§ 1797.170 - 1797.172, 1797.185, 1797.192,

1797.194, and 1797.214

10.2. California Code of Regulations, Title 22, §§ 100090.08, 100094.01, 100094.02, 100097.01, &

100097.02

6

