SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

Policy Reference No.: 2001

Effective Date: January 1, 2011
Review Date: January 1, 2013
Supersedes: August 1, 2007

USE OF STANDARD AND SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES TREATMENT
PROTOCOLS

I.  PURPOSE

A.  To develop a standard approach to utilizing the San Francisco EMS Agency
Standard Treatment Protocols.
B.  To develop a standard approach for utilizing the San Francisco EMS Agency
Treatment Protocols for Special Circumstances.

II.  AUTHORITY

A.  California Health and Safety Code, Section 1797 et seq. and 1798 et seq.
B.  California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9
C.  San Francisco Health Code, Section 901

III.  POLICY

1. STANDARD CIRCUMSTANCES

A.  Prehospital personnel shall initiate BLS measures and then proceed to ALS
measures as dictated by the patient assessment and scope of practice.

B.  Prehospital personnel shall utilize good clinical judgment and consider
additional resources as needed.

C.  BLS personnel shall request an ALS response unit to the scene or rapidly
transport the patient to the nearest open Receiving Hospital according to EMS
Agency Policy.

D.  Routine Medical Care should be provided to every patient as guided by
assessment of the scene and the patient’s condition.

E.  When situations and/or patient conditions are not addressed by a Standard
Treatment Protocol, prehospital personnel shall utilize other pre-existing standard
life support guidelines, including PHTLS, ACLS, PALS and good medical
judgment. Paramedics must make Base Hospital Physician contact for deviations
from EMS Agency treatment protocols and/or policies.

F.  The Base Hospital Physician provides on-line medical consultation according
to EMS Agency Policy.

Page 1

Policy Reference No.: 2001

Effective Date:  January 1, 2011

G.  ALS Optional Scope practices shall be reviewed at the EMS Agency Clinical
Advisory Committee.

2. SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES

H.  Prehospital personnel shall consider the use of a Treatment Protocol for
Special Circumstances only if the indications for treatment are met AND the
appropriate authority has approved its use.
I.  The authority to initiate care according to the “Treatment Protocols for
Special Circumstances” is cited in the individual protocols. This authority must
come from the San Francisco Emergency Medical Director or his/her designee

1.  The EMS Agency Duty Officer is the primary point of contact for the
EMS System and will notify the providers that approval to initiate using
the Special Treatment Protocols has been obtained from the EMS Agency
Medical Director or his/her designee.

J.  Prehospital personnel shall contact the Base Hospital Physician when the
protocol states that BHMD approval is required, for clinical consultation, and/or
for deviation from clinical care described in the treatment protocols.
K.  Routine Medical Care (RMC), Advanced Life Support (ALS) and Basic Life
Support (BLS) are as defined in this Policy: Use of Standard and Special
Treatment Protocols, unless otherwise defined in the individual protocol within
this section.
L.  EMS prehospital and Base Hospital personnel shall maintain proficiency in
the use of all EMS Agency Treatment Protocols for Special Circumstances.

Page 2

