SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

Policy Reference No.: 2020

Effective Date:  January 1, 2011
Review Date: January 1, 2013
Supersedes:  February 1, 2004

EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN PROGRAM APPROVAL

I.  PURPOSE

A.  Establish the standards for EMT training programs in San Francisco
B.  Define the approval process for application submission and site review

II.  AUTHORITY

A.  California Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, Section 1797.208
B.  California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Sections 100065-100078

III. POLICY

A.  A qualified agency wishing to offer an Emergency Medical Technician-1
(EMT-1) training program shall submit a written request to the local Emergency
Medical Services (EMS) Agency.
B.  Training shall be in compliance with requirements set forth in 22 CCR 100065
– 100078.
C. Program approval or disapproval shall be made in writing by the local EMS
Agency to the requesting training program within 90 days after receipt of all
required documentation.
D. Program approval shall be for four years following the effective date of
program approval and may be renewed every four years by following the
procedure outlined above for initial program approval.
E.  All programs and materials shall be subject to periodic on site evaluations by
the EMS Agency and the EMS Authority.
F.  Denial, Revocation, or Suspension of Program Approval

1.  Non-compliance with any criteria required for program approval, use
of any unqualified teaching personnel, or noncompliance with any other
applicable provisions of the California Code of Regulations, Title 22,
Division 9, Chapter 2, may result in suspension, or revocation of program
approval by the local EMS Agency.
2.  The program director will be notified in writing of the deficiency and
be given an opportunity to comply within a specified period of time.
3.  Failure to correct deficiencies and/or to otherwise respond to
directions will be cause for the local EMS Agency to:

a)  Place the program on a probationary status with conditions for
improvement and/or
b)  Denial, withdrawal, or suspension of program approval.

IV. PROCEDURE

A.  All applications made to the EMS Agency shall include:

Page 1

Policy Reference No.: 2020

Effective Date: January 1, 2011

1.  A statement verifying usage of United States Department of
Transportation’s EMT-Basic curriculum, DOT HS 808 149, August 1994,
which includes learning objectives, skills protocols, and treatment
guidelines
2.  Session guidelines or lesson plans
3.  A course outline if different than the State EMT-1 curriculum format
4.  Performance objectives for each skill
5.  Samples of written and skills examinations used for periodic testing
6.  A final skills competency examination
7.  A final written examination
8.  The name and qualifications of the program director, program clinical
coordinator, and principal instructor(s)
9.  Provisions for clinical hospital and ambulance experience training for
EMT-1 programs to include performance objectives
10. Provisions for course completion by challenge including a challenge
examination (if different from final examination)
11. Provisions for refresher course or any courses required for
recertification, plus a refresher exam
12. The location at which the courses are to be offered and their proposed
dates
13. A copy of the course completion certificate
14. Procedure for the distribution of the local EMS Agency’s rules,
regulations, and certification process to all categories of students
15. Table of contents listing the required information listed in this
subsection, with corresponding page numbers

B.  Notification of Courses

1.  The local EMS Agency shall be notified of all course offerings 30 days
before the starting date of the course.
2.  Persons or agencies conducting an approved training program must
notify the local EMS Agency in writing, in advance when possible and in
all cases within 30 days of any change in course content, hours of
instruction, program director, program clinical coordinator, or principal
instructor(s), with name and qualifications of any new personnel.
3.  Program director must ensure that the program maintains compliance
with applicable sections contained in the California Code of Regulations,
Title 22, Division 9, Chapter 2.
4.  When changes occur in regulations, the program director must notify
the local EMS Agency of compliance with changes within 30 days of the
effective date of the regulations.

Page 2

