SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

Policy Reference No.: 2030
Effective Date: January 7, 2013
Supersedes:  January 1, 2011

PARAMEDIC PROGRAM APPROVAL

NOTE: Policy reposted on website with new effective date January 7, 2013. Minor
change to section III. C. stating program approval must be renewed every four years.
There were no other changes to policy content.

I.  PURPOSE

A.  Establish standards for paramedic training programs in San Francisco
B.  Provide a mechanism for approval for programs by the EMS Agency

II.  AUTHORITY

A.  California Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, Sections 1797.172 and
1797.208
B.  California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Sections 100047-100062.1

III. POLICY

A.  Eligible training institutions that wish to be approved as an Emergency
Medical Technician-Paramedic (EMT-P) training program shall submit a written
request to the local Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Agency.
B.  Program approval or disapproval will be made by the local EMS Agency in
writing within 90 days of receipt of all required documentation.
C.  Program approval must be renewed every four years subject to the procedures
specified in this policy.
D.  All program materials are subject to periodic reviews.
E.  All programs are subject to periodic on-site evaluation.
F.  Persons or agencies conducting an approved training program must notify the
local EMS Agency in writing, in advance when possible and in all cases within 30
days, of any change in course content, hours of instruction, program director,
course director, program medical director, provisions for hospital clinical
experience or field internship, with name and qualifications of any new personnel.
G.  Course director shall ensure that the program maintains compliance with
applicable sections contained in Title 22 of the California Administrative Code,
Division 9, Chapter 4.  When changes occur in regulations which affect this
program, the program director must notify the local EMS Agency of compliance
with changes within 30 days of the effective date of the regulations.
H.  Denial, Revocation, or Suspension of Program Approval

1.  Non-compliance with any criteria required for program approval, use
of any unqualified teaching personnel, or non-compliance with any other
applicable provisions of Title 22 of the California Administrative Code,

Page 1

Policy Reference No.: 2030

Effective Date: January 1, 2011

Division 9, Chapter 4, may result in suspension, or revocation of program
approval by the local EMS Agency.
2.  The program director will be notified in writing of the deficiency and
be given an opportunity to comply within a specified period of time.
3.  Failure to correct deficiencies and/or to otherwise respond to
directions will be cause for the local EMS Agency to:

a)  Place the program on a probationary status with conditions for
improvement and/or
b)  Denial, withdrawal or suspension of program approval.

IV. PROCEDURE

A.  Applications to the EMS Agency shall include:
1.  A statement of course objectives
2.  A course outline
3.  Performance objectives for each skill
4.  The name and qualifications of the training program course director,
program medical director, and principal instructors
5.  Provisions for supervised hospital clinical training including student
evaluation criteria and standardized forms for evaluating EMT-P students;
and monitoring of preceptors by the training program
6.  Provisions for supervised field internship including student evaluation
criteria and standardized forms for evaluating EMT-P students; and
monitoring of preceptors by the training program
7.  The location at which the courses are to be offered and their proposed
dates
8.  Table of Contents listing the required topics and skills pursuant to
Section 100159, Required Course Content
9.  Course material related to any approved optional procedures

B.  Examination Review

1.  The local EMS Agency shall review the following prior to program
approval:

a)  Samples of written and skills examinations administered by the
training program for periodic testing
b)  A final skills competency examination
c)  A final written examination administered by the training
program
d)  Evidence that the program provide adequate facilities,
equipment, examination security, and student record keeping
e)  A copy of the course completion certificate

Page 2

