SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

Policy Reference No.: 2040
Effective Date:  July 31, 2019
Supersedes:  September 9, 2013

EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN CERTIFICATION

I.

PURPOSE

Indentify requirements for Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) certification in the City
and County of San Francisco.

II.

POLICY

A.  Initial or re-certification applicants for as an EMT in the City and County of San

Francisco apply to the San Francisco EMS Agency for an EMT Certificate.  Applicants
must meet all minimum requirements identified in this policy.

B.  The California Health & Safety Code, Section 1798.200 lists categories of actions
constituting a threat to public health safety that may preclude an individual from
obtaining an EMT Certification.  EMT applicants may be required to submit
additional information or have an in-person interview for determination of the
applicability of Health & Safety Code, Section 1798.200.   The EMS Agency Medical
Director retains the final decision through his/her medical authority whether to
grant or revoke an EMT certification in San Francisco.

III.  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL EMT APPLICANTS

A.  Be 18 years of age or older.
B.  Complete a San Francisco EMS Agency EMT certification application form and

provide all requested information on that form (obtained directly from the EMS
Agency office or downloaded from the website) along with the required fee.
C.  Submit photocopy of current picture identification (State driver’s license or ID card,

valid Passport, valid US military ID card or other government-issued ID).

D.  Submit photocopy of current Basic Life Support (Healthcare Provider Level) CPR Card
from the American Heart Association, American Red Cross or American Safety &
Health Institute.

IV.

INITIAL EMT CERTIFICATION / OUT-OF-STATE CURRENT EMT CERTIFICATE

A.  Meet all general requirements listed in Section III above.
B.  Submit photocopy of a valid EMT course completion record, or other documented
proof of successful completion of an approved EMT course, or out-of-state EMT
training course within the last 2 years. First-time EMT applicants in any California
county only have 24 months, after they pass their EMT course to apply for

Page 1

Policy Reference No.: 2040
Effective Date:  July 31, 2019

California EMT certification. Out-of-state applicants must also provide the name,
address and telephone number of the EMT course director.

C.  Submit photocopy of National Registry of EMT Certificate and Certification Card.

Out-of-state applicants must also provide the name, address and telephone number
of the issuer of the National Registry EMT Certificates and cards.

D.  Complete a Live Scan Fingerprint and Department of Justice / FBI Background Check
(obtained directly from the EMS Agency office or downloaded from the website).

V.

RECERTIFICATION- CURRENT EMT CERTIFICATE

A.  Meet all general requirements listed in Section III.
B.  Submit a photocopy of a current EMT certification card.
C.  Complete the State of California EMT Skills Competency Verification Form - EMSA-
SCV 01/17 (obtained directly from the EMS Agency office or downloaded from the
website).

D.  Submit photocopy of completed Live Scan Fingerprint and Department of Justice /

FBI Background Check (obtained directly from the EMS Agency office or downloaded
from the website) if the previous EMT Certification was not issued by the San
Francisco EMS Agency.

E.  Provide proof of 24-hours of continuing education (CE) training:

1.  Photocopy of EMT Refresher Course Completion Certificate from an

approved EMT training program;

2.  Photocopies of Continuing Education Unit (CEU) Certificates from an

approved continuing education provider;

3.  No more than 12 hours of on-line CEUs will be accepted.

F.  The EMS Medical Director must approve other courses such college anatomy or
physiology / etc. for CE credit.  Generally, applicants will be asked to provide
additional course documentation.

G.  Starting July 1, 2019, EMTs must submit proof of Epinephrine, Naloxone, and

Glucometer training from an approved training program or CE Provider on the first
renewal, that meets state competency requirements, in order renew an EMT
Certificate. This training is in addition to the Skills Competency Verification Form
listed in Section V, C. A copy of a current Paramedic License can substituted for the
training listed above. This requirement is waived if an applicant took an EMT
Certification class (must provide certificate of completion) after July 1, 2018.

VI.

RECERTIFICATION - LAPSED CERTIFICATE LESS THAN 6 MONTHS

Same steps for recertification of a current certificate listed in Sections V above.

VII.

RECERTIFICATION - LAPSED CERTIFICATE GREATER THAN 6 MONTHS, BUT LESS THAN
12 MONTHS

Page 2

Policy Reference No.: 2040
Effective Date:  July 31, 2019

A.  Same steps for recertification of a current certificate listed in Section V except the

total number of required continuing education units is 36-hours.

B.  Provide photocopy of NEW completed Live Scan Fingerprint and Department of
Justice / FBI Background Check (obtained directly from the EMS Agency office or
downloaded from the website).

VIII.

RECERTIFICATION - LAPSED CERTIFICATE GREATER THAN 12 MONTHS

A.  Same steps for recertification of a current certificate listed in Section V except the

total number of required continuing education units is 48-hours.

B.  Provide photocopy of CURRENT National Registry of EMT Certificate and

Certification Card.

C.  Provide photocopy of NEW completed Live Scan Fingerprint and Department of
Justice / FBI Background Check (obtained directly from the EMS Agency office or
downloaded from the website).

IX.  OUT-OF-STATE CERTIFICATION WITH LAPSED CERTIFICATE

There is no reciprocity for expired out-of-state EMTs. Start by taking an EMT course in California
to obtain an EMT course completion record.

X.

AUTHORITY
California Health and Safety Code, Sections 1797.210 and 1798.200
California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Chapter 2, Sections 100075, 100079 - 100081

Page 3

