SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY

MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

PARAMEDIC ACCREDITATION

EFFECTIVE DATE: 10/1/2025

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 2050

SUPERSEDES: 11/1/23

1.  PURPOSE

1.1.  To establish procedures for a California licensed Paramedic to become accredited in the City

and County of San Francisco under the following Accreditation sub-types:
1.1.1.  Advanced Life Support (ALS) Local Accreditation
1.1.2.  Community Paramedicine (CP)
1.1.3.  Triage to Alternate Destination (TAD)

2.  POLICY

2.1.  Paramedic Accreditation is valid when a Paramedic is employed by and on-duty with a

permitted San Francisco ALS Provider.

2.2.  Paramedic applicants must answer all background disclosure questions accurately on all

application forms. Individuals with a background as listed under Health and Safety Code §
1798.200 may be precluded from obtaining Accreditation. Paramedic Accreditation applicants
may be required to submit additional information or participate in an in-person interview.
Denial, Suspension, or Revocation of Accreditation shall be subject to provisions of this policy
and Policy 2070 (Certiﬁcate / License Discipline Process for Prehospital Personnel).  The EMS
Agency Medical Director retains ﬁnal decision-making authority pertaining to Paramedic
Accreditation.

2.3.  For TAD and CP Accreditation, Paramedics must maintain an active, unrestricted Paramedic

license issued by the EMS Authority. A restricted Paramedic license includes sanctions such as,
but not limited to, probation. Failure to maintain an active, unrestricted Paramedic license may
lead to revocation and/or denial of a TAD and/or CP Accreditation.

3.  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL ALS LOCAL ACCREDITATION PARAMEDICS

3.1.  No person shall use the paramedic scope of practice in San Francisco unless they are currently
an Accredited Paramedic or have completed the requirements to be an ALS Local Accreditation
Candidate.

3.2.  Submit a completed San Francisco EMS Agency Paramedic Accreditation application. This

includes:
3.2.1.  Copy of current picture identiﬁcation (State driver’s license or ID card, valid Passport,

valid US military ID card or other government-issued ID)

3.2.2.  Copy of current California Paramedic license

1

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 2050

EFFECTIVE DATE: 10/1/25

3.2.3.  Proof or application for TAD Accreditation if working on an ambulance or transporting

patients to TAD Facilities

3.2.4.  Payment of fees

4.  INITIAL ACCREDITATION - ALS LOCAL ACCREDITATION

4.1.  Submission of all general requirements listed in Section 3.
4.2.  Submit copies of current certiﬁcation cards or proof of course completion for the following:
4.2.1.  Current Basic Life Support (Healthcare Provider Level) CPR Card from the American
Heart Association, American Red Cross or American Safety & Health Institute

4.2.2.  Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS)
4.2.3.  Pediatric Advanced Life Support (PALS) or Pediatric Education for Prehospital

Professionals (PEPP)

4.2.4.  Prehospital Trauma Life Support (PHTLS) or Basic Trauma Life Support (BTLS)

4.3.  Provide veriﬁcation of successful completion of a San Francisco EMS system orientation given

by the employer. Required components of initial training include local San Francisco:
4.3.1.  EMS System organization and geography
4.3.2.  EMS policies and patient treatment protocols
4.3.3.  Local Optional Scope of Practice (LOSOP) Protocols
4.3.4.  Mass Casualty Incident (MCI) Plan
4.3.5.  ICS-100 and ICS-200 (Basic ICS)
4.3.6.  FEMA IS-700a (Introduction to National Incident Management System)
4.3.7.  ICS-300 (Paramedic Supervisors-only)
4.3.8.  Hazmat ﬁrst responder awareness course (FRA) per 29 CFR 1910-120
4.3.9.  Ten (10) ALS patient contacts with a Field Training Oﬃcer (FTO) as a third person and
successfully pass FTO evaluation in the following areas, appropriate knowledge
expected of the level of San Francisco geography and EMS policies and protocols

4.3.10. The ten (10) ALS patient contact requirement is waived for any ALS Local Paramedic

Accreditation applicant who completed a majority of internship hours within San
Francisco under the following conditions:
4.3.10.1. The internship hours were 911 responses
4.3.10.2. The internship was completed with a permitted San Francisco ALS Provider

Agency

4.3.10.3. The internship was successfully completed within past year

4.4.  The EMS Agency shall process the accreditation application within fourteen (14) business days
of receiving it. Fourteen (14) business day timeline starts upon receipt of a fully complete
application that meets all requirements. The accreditation applicant may perform the basic
Paramedic scope of practice with a second accredited Paramedic until receipt of local
accreditation.

4.5.  The initial accreditation term shall be from the date issued until the applicant’s license expires.

Upon renewal, accreditation will be concurrent with California Paramedic License.

2

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 2050

EFFECTIVE DATE: 10/1/25

5.  RENEWAL - ALS LOCAL ACCREDITATION

5.1.  Accreditation for practice shall be continuous as long as licensure is maintained, and the

following requirements are met:
5.1.1.  Submission of all general requirements listed in Section 3
5.1.2.  Veriﬁcation of employment as a Paramedic from a permitted San Francisco ambulance

provider

5.1.3.  Veriﬁcation from the employer of completion of training on EMS Agency policy and
protocols and updates or any other trainings required by the EMS Agency Medical
Director that have been issued in the previous 24 months

5.1.4.  Submit copies of current certiﬁcation cards for the following:

5.1.4.1.  Current Basic Life Support (Healthcare Provider Level) CPR Card from the

American Heart Association, American Red Cross or American Safety & Health
Institute

5.1.4.2.  Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS)
5.1.4.3.  Pediatric Advanced Life Support (PALS) or Pediatric Education for Prehospital

Professionals (PEPP)

6.  LICENSE OR ACCREDITATION REINSTATEMENT - ALS LOCAL ACCREDITATION

6.1.  An accreditation reinstatement occurs when an ALS Local Accreditation or Paramedic License

is expired/lapsed.

6.2.  If reinstatement is twelve (12) months or less:

6.2.1.  Meet requirements for Renewal in Section 5
6.2.2.  Submit written request from San Francisco ALS Provider for reinstatement

6.3.  If reinstatement is twelve (12) months or more:
6.3.1.  Meet requirements for Initial in Section 4

7.  ALS PROVIDER REQUIREMENTS - ALS LOCAL ACCREDITATION

7.1.  ALS Providers shall:

7.1.1.  Notify the EMS Agency within ten (10) business days of a Paramedic leaving

employment

7.1.2.  Notify the EMS Agency within ten (10) business days of a Paramedic starting

employment

7.1.3.  Notify the EMS Agency when orientation with the new employer has been completed.

This includes all EMS Agency policy and protocols updates based on last shift in the
ﬁeld with previous employer. Notiﬁcation shall be made at least two (2) business days
in advance of ﬁrst shift in the ﬁeld

7.1.4.  The Accreditation must remain current or renewed under Section 5
7.1.5.  No notiﬁcation is required for TAD or CP Accreditation

8.  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR TAD ACCREDITATION APPLICANTS

3

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 2050

EFFECTIVE DATE: 10/1/25

8.1.  A TAD Paramedic shall only utilize TAD skills when accredited by the San Francisco EMS Agency

as a TAD Paramedic and employed by an approved San Francisco TAD Service Provider.
8.2.  An initial TAD Paramedic accreditation shall expire on the last day of the month, two (2) years
from the eﬀective date of the initial accreditation or consistent with the expiration date of
already existing ALS Local Accreditation.

8.3.  TAD accreditation requires renewal every two (2) years or by date as listed on accreditation

card.

8.4.  California Paramedic License must be active and unrestricted.
8.5.  Payment of any associated fees.
8.6.  TAD Accreditation is required for any Paramedic working on an ambulance or transporting

patients to TAD Facilities with an approved TAD Provider. TAD Accreditation is optional for any
Paramedic not assigned to or working on an ambulance.

8.7.  Paramedics who have an active, restricted Paramedic license, which includes probation, may
request a waiver of Section 8.6 by submitting a written request to the San Francisco EMS
Agency Medical Director. Any Paramedic with a waiver of Section 8.6 cannot transport to TAD
Facility until obtaining a TAD Accreditation upon receiving an active, unrestricted license from
the state.

9.  INITIAL ACCREDITATION – TAD

9.1.  Submission of all general requirements listed in Section 3
9.2.  Completed TAD application
9.3.  TAD course completion certiﬁcate from a San Francisco EMS Agency-approved course

10. RENEWAL ACCREDIATION – TAD

10.1. Submission of all general requirements listed in Section 3
10.2. Completed TAD application
10.3. Completion of four (4) hours TAD-related Continuing Education (CEs) approved by the San

Francisco EMS Agency

11. REINSTATEMENT OF ACCREDIATION - TAD

11.1. Submission of all general requirements listed in Section 3
11.2. Completed TAD application
11.3. If expired twelve (12) months or less, completion of four (4) hours of TAD-related CEs

approved by the San Francisco EMS Agency

11.4. If expired twelve (12) months or more, San Francisco EMS Agency-approved TAD course
completion certiﬁcate within one (1) year of reinstatement application submission date

12. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR CP ACCREDITATION APPLICANTS

12.1. A CP shall only utilize CP skills when accredited by the San Francisco EMS Agency as a CP and

employed by an approved San Francisco CP service provider

4

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 2050

EFFECTIVE DATE: 10/1/25

12.2. An Initial CP Accreditation shall expire on the last day of the month, two (2) years from the

eﬀective date of the initial accreditation or consistent with the expiration date of the already
existing ALS Local Accreditation

12.3. CP Accreditation requires renewal every two (2) years or by date as listed on accreditation card
12.4. California Paramedic license must be active and unrestricted
12.5. Payment of any associated fees

13. INITIAL ACCREDIATION – CP

13.1. Submission of all general requirements listed in Section 3
13.2. Completed CP application
13.3. CP course completion certiﬁcate from a San Francisco EMS Agency-approved course

International Board of Specialty (IBSC) Community Paramedic certiﬁcate within the last two (2)
years of the date of application submission

14. RENEWAL ACCREDITATION – CP

14.1. Submission of all general requirements listed in Section 3
14.2. Completed CP application
14.3. Completion of one of the following:

14.3.1.  Eight (8) hours CP-related CEs approved by the San Francisco EMS Agency
14.3.2. Proof of continued active, unrestricted IBSC CP certiﬁcate

15. REINSTATEMENT OF ACCREDITATION – CP

15.1. Submission of all general requirements as listed in Section 3
15.2. Completed CP application
15.3. If expired twelve (12) months or less, completion of one of the following:

15.3.1.  Eight (8) hours CP-related CEs approved by the San Francisco EMS Agency
15.3.2.  Proof of active, unrestricted IBSC CP certiﬁcate

15.4. If expired twelve (12) months or more, San Francisco EMS Agency-approved CP course

completion certiﬁcate and proof of passing IBSC CP examination within the last two (2) years
from the submission date of the reinstatement application

16. AUTHORITY

16.1. California Health and Safety Code §§ 1797.52, 1797.172, 1797.174-1797.178, 1797.180,

1797.185, 1797.194, 1797.212, 1797.214, 1797.218, 1797.220, 1798.200-1798.205, and 1801-
1857.

16.2. California Code of Regulations, Title 22 §§ 100090.01-100097.02, 100111.01-100112.01, and

100115.01-100115.12.

5

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 2050

APPENDIX A – PARAMEDIC ACCREDITATION SUMMARY

EFFECTIVE DATE: 10/1/2025

Accreditation
Type

ALS Local

Cert Cycle

Required?

Every 2 years,
expiration matches
EMT-P License

All EMT-Ps

State license may
be restricted (e.g.
probation)?
Yes – Disclosure
Required

TAD

CP

Every 2 years,
expiration diﬀerent
from EMT-P License

No – Submit
waiver request to
LEMSA for EMT-P
who has State
License on
Probation

All EMT-Ps who work
for a TAD Provider and
work on a transport
ambulance

ALS Providers may
require TAD for non-
transport Paramedics
(e.g. CP, ﬁrst response)

Every 2 years,
expiration diﬀerent
from EMT-P License

All Paramedics who
work in the capacity of
a CP

No

Initial

Renewal

Reinstatement
< 1 Year

Reinstatement
> 1 Year

ALS Provider required
notiﬁcations to LEMSA

ID
State EMT-P
CPR
ACLS
PALS/PEPP
PHTLS/BTLS
ICS
FRA
Orientation
10 ALS

ID
State EMT-P
ALS Local
TAD Course

ID
State EMT-P
CPR
ACLS
PALS/PEPP

ID
State EMT-P
CPR
ACLS
PALS/PEPP

ID
State EMT-P
ALS Local
4 hrs TAD CE
or TAD Course

ID
State EMT-P
ALS Local
4 hrs TAD CE or
TAD Course

EMT-P leaves employment
(within 10 days)

EMT-P starts employment
(within 10 days)

Prior to ﬁrst shift (within 2
days)

No notiﬁcation required

ID
State EMT-P
CPR
ACLS
PALS/PEPP
PHTLS/BTLS
ICS
FRA
Orientation
10 ALS

ID
State EMT-P
ALS Local
TAD Course

ID
State EMT-P
ALS Local
CP Course
IBSC

ID
State EMT-P
ALS Local
8 hrs CP CE or
IBSC

ID
State EMT-P
ALS Local
8 hrs CP CE or
IBSC

ID
State EMT-P
ALS Local
CP course
IBSC

No notiﬁcation required

6

