SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY

MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

PRECEPTORS FOR PARAMEDIC STUDENT INTERNS

EFFECTIVE DATE: 10/01/25

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 2051

SUPERSEDES: 12/26/17

1.  PURPOSE

1.1.  Establish standards for preceptors supervising paramedic student interns.
1.2.  Identify the ALS provider agency responsibilities when providing preceptors and ﬁeld training

for paramedic student interns.

1.3.  Identify the paramedic training program responsibilities for oversight of their paramedic

student interns receiving ﬁeld training through an ALS provider agency.

2.  POLICY

2.1.  Paramedic training programs and ALS provider agencies are jointly responsible for ensuring

that student preceptors meet the standards delineated in the policy and that patient care
delivered by paramedic student interns is done in a safe manner.

3.  PRECEPTOR MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS

3.1.  Current California Paramedic license.
3.2.  Current accreditation as a Paramedic in San Francisco
3.3.  At least two (2) years (full time or equivalent) as a paramedic on an ALS ambulance within the
prior three (3) years.  Preceptor candidate must have a minimum of six months of work as an
accredited paramedic in San Francisco.

3.4.  No disciplinary or clinical actions currently pending or within the prior 12 months against his /

her accreditation, licensure, or employment.

3.5.  Current certiﬁcation as a paramedic preceptor after completion of a Paramedic Preceptor

course.

3.6.  Paramedic Preceptor courses must meet the requirements in California Code of Regulations,

Title 22, §100092.02 (h)(4) and be approved by the EMS Agency medical director.

4.  ALS AMBULANCE PROVIDER RESPONSIBILTIES

4.1.  ALS provider agencies must verify that any paramedic training programs has been approved by
a local Agency before they can enter into a written agreement with that program to provide
preceptors and ﬁeld training to paramedic student interns.

4.2.  Ambulance provider companies must ensure that suﬃcient staﬃng levels to allow preceptors
to maintain direct supervision of an intern during the course of all patient care provided.
Interns must have an assigned preceptor, and may not provide patient care without the

1

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 2051

EFFECTIVE DATE: 10/01/25

assigned preceptor being present. The company must also maintain records of the student
intern ﬁeld assignments and patient contacts.

4.3.  No more than one (1) student trainee shall be assigned to a response vehicle at any one time

during the paramedic student’s ﬁeld internship.

4.4.  Preceptors must co-sign all patient care records completed by a paramedic student intern.

5.  PARAMEDIC TRAINING PROGRAM RESPONSIBLITIES

5.1.  Paramedic training programs must be approved by a local EMS Agency before they can enter
into a written agreement with a San Francisco permitted ALS provider agencies to provide
preceptors and ﬁeld training to paramedic student interns.

5.2.  Paramedic training programs are responsible for ensuring that the ﬁeld preceptor has the

experience and training as required by California Code of Regulations, Title 22, § 100092.02
(h).

5.3.  The paramedic training program shall be responsible for continuously monitoring the progress

of the intern during the ﬁeld internship.

5.4.  The paramedic training program must report to the EMS Agency the name of the paramedic

intern, the name of the ﬁeld internship provider, the name of the preceptor, proof of Triage to
Alternate Destination (TAD) training completion, and estimated start/end date of internship.
5.5.  The paramedic training program shall be accredited by the Commission on Accreditation of

Allied Health Education Program (CAAHEP) and abide by the current standards set forth by the
CAAHEP and Credible Education. Committee on Accreditation of Educational Programs for the
Emergency Medical Services Profession (CoAEMSP).

6.  AUTHORITY

6.1.  California Code of Regulations, Title 22, §§100091.04, 100092.02, & 100092.04 - 100092.05

2

