SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

Policy Reference No.: 2052
Effective Date: September 9, 2013
Supersedes:  August 1, 2011

PARAMEDIC FIELD SUPERVISOR

I.

PURPOSE
A.  To establish minimum qualifications and scope of responsibilities for field

paramedics supervisors.

B.  Identify the ALS provider agency responsibilities when providing field supervisors.

II.

POLICY

A.  Paramedic supervisors are responsible for the day-to-day clinical and operational

supervision of field paramedics and supervisory roles within the ICS structure during
a multi-casualty incident.

B.  All ALS Providers shall have at a minimum at least one Paramedic Field Supervisor on
duty and available to respond 24-hours a day. The Paramedic Supervisor staffing
ratio shall be one on-duty Paramedic Field Supervisor for every 10 on-duty ALS
response or transport vehicles in order to maintain a reasonable span of control and
availability for a field response. The EMS Medical Director may approve alternate
supervisor to staff ratios provided only if they are included in the individual
Paramedic Service Provider Agreement.

III.

PARAMEDIC SUPERVISOR MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS

A.  Meet all San Francisco EMS paramedic accreditation standards as outline in Policy

2050 Paramedic Accreditation.

B.  Have two years experience as a paramedic (full time or equivalent) in an urban or

suburban area that included 911 emergency responses.

C.  Successfully complete an approved Paramedic Supervisor Training course within six

months of placement.

D.  Have proof of training or participation in the following:

1.  Incident Command System (ICS) 100, 200, 300 and IS 700 or Standardized

Emergency Management System (SEMS) Orientation, Basic, Intermediate and
Advanced courses, or an approved equivalent;

Page 1

Policy Reference No.: 2052
Effective Date: September 9, 2013

2.  Incident Command System (ICS) 100, 200, 300 and IS 700 or Standardized

Emergency Management System (SEMS) Orientation, Basic, Intermediate and
Advanced courses, or an approved equivalent;

3.  San Francisco EMS Policies and Protocols with emphasis on the Medical Group
Supervisor role in Multi-Casualty Incidents and Level I, II, and III disasters;

4.  At least one annual MCI training and exercise with participation in a supervisory

role within the ICS structure;

5.  Radio communications protocols and troubleshooting;
6.  Provider Internal Disaster Plan;
7.  Federal HIPPA and EMTALA regulations relating to EMS;
8.  California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9 and California Health and Safety Code,

Division 2.5 (The “EMS Act").

9.  Techniques for basic incident investigation and follow up; and
10. Conflict resolution & interpersonal communication.

C.  Paramedics are prohibited from being a Paramedic Field Supervisor for any of the

following reasons:
1.  Have currently pending action or past action in the previous three years against

any medical license, accreditation, or certification.

2.  Are currently on probation or suspension as a result of any action against any

medical license, accreditation, or certification.

3.  Paramedics who were on probation which exceeded the 3 year exclusionary

period may be a Paramedic Field Supervisor upon successful completion of the
probationary period, provided no more recent licensure actions are pending or
have been taken.

IV.

FIELD DEPLOYMENT

A.  Paramedic Field Supervisors will respond when requested by the DEC, provider
dispatch, hospital, or field personnel and in accordance with provider policy.

B.  Paramedic Field Supervisors may respond on any call when their agency is

responding, or to assist another agency’s personnel as requested by that agency.

V.

PATIENT CARE AUTHORITY

A.  The Base Hospital Physician has the final authority over patient care decisions in
the field.  Paramedic Field Supervisors may not authorize deviations from EMS
Agency policy or protocol, or in any way act as a substitute for the Base Hospital
Physician.

B.  Paramedic Field Supervisors may assist and provide clinical guidance with patient

care without assuming all patient care responsibilities. Paramedic Field Supervisors

Page 2

Policy Reference No.: 2052
Effective Date: September 9, 2013

are not considered to have expanded clinical authority under EMS Agency Policy or
State law.

C.  Paramedic Field Supervisors may not unilaterally assume care of a patient from

another paramedic unless it is a mutually agreed to transfer of care. No Paramedic
Field Supervisor shall assume authority over another agency’s personnel except
under the following circumstances:

1.  Under prearranged agreements between individual agencies;
2.  When directed to do so by the Base Hospital Physician; and
3.  During a multi-agency response in which the Paramedic Field Supervisor has
been assigned by an Incident Commander to be branch or section leader in
the ICS structure (e.g. Medical Group Supervisor) and the personnel are
reporting to that branch or section are directly involved in the multi-agency
response.

D.  In any event when a Paramedic Field Supervisor assumes all patient care

responsibilities, the Paramedic Field Supervisor must accompany the patient to the
hospital and document care provided on the patient’s Prehospital Care Report.

VI.

AUTHORITY

California Health & Safety Code, Division 2.5, Section 1797.220
U.S. Code of Federal Regulations 42 1395dd

Page 3

