SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

Policy Reference No.: 2060
Effective Date: December 1, 2004
Review Date: January1, 2011
Supersedes:  February 1, 2004

CONTINUING EDUCATION APPROVAL

I.  PURPOSE

A.  Establish standards for Prehospital Continuing Education (CE) providers
located in San Francisco.
B.  Provide a mechanism for course approval and establish the procedural
requirements of Prehospital CE providers.
C.  Identify those programs or courses with standing approval from the EMS
Agency for the purposes of prehospital continuing education.

II.  AUTHORITY

A.  California Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, Sections 1797.173 –
1797.175
B.  California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Chapter 12

III. POLICY

A.  Continuing Education providers shall comply with the requirements of
Chapter 11 of Title 22 of the California Code of Regulations.
B.  The San Francisco (SF) Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Agency shall
grant or deny approval of CE providers whose training sites are located in the City
and County of San Francisco.
C.  The EMS Agency may audit the records of, or visit the site of, any CE
Provider program for the purposes of compliance monitoring.
D.  Probation, Revocation, and Denial of CE Provider Authorization

1.  The SF EMS Agency may, for cause, disapprove an application for
approval, revoke CE provider approval or place the CE provider on
probation.  Written notice will be issued by the EMS Agency specifying
the reasons for disapproval, revocation, or probation.  Reasons for
negative actions include, but are not limited to:

a)  Violations of CE guidelines, provisions of this policy, and/or
applicable section of Title 22 of the California Code of
Regulations.
b)  Willful misrepresentation of fact by CE provider or applicant.
c)  Repeated failures to correct identified deficiencies.
2.  CE credit issued after the date of disapproval or revocation will be
revoked.
3.  Terms of probation will include a corrective action plan to be
determined by the EMS Agency.

Page 1

Policy Reference No.: 2060
Effective Date: December 1, 2004

4.  Renewal during probation is contingent upon successful
implementation of the corrective action plan.

IV. PROCEDURE

A.  Approval Process

1.  Interested organizations or individuals shall submit an application to
the EMS Agency.
2.  The EMS Agency will provide, upon request, an application packet for
CE provider approval.
3.  The application shall be considered for approval if it is complete, if all
supplemental material requested is submitted, and if it meets requirements
of Section III of the State of California Guidelines for Prehospital
Continuing Education.
4.  The EMS Agency will review the materials for compliance with State
guidelines and issue a “CE provider number” in accordance with State
regulations and guidelines.
5.  If the above conditions are met, the EMS Agency will grant approval
for a four year period expiring on the last day of the month in which the
CE application was approved.

B.  CE Provider Responsibilities and Requirements

1.  Approved CE providers are responsible for adherence to all
requirements as outlined in the State of California Guidelines for
Prehospital Continuing Education, Title 22, and SF EMS Agency policy
and procedure.
2.  CE provider shall ensure, at a minimum, the following:
a)  Relevant EMS or prehospital content of all CE.
b)  Maintenance of records as specified in the State of California
Guidelines for Prehospital Continuing Education.
c)  Notifying the SF EMS Agency of any changes in program
name, address, phone, program director, and/or clinical director.

3.  All records are made available to the EMS Agency upon request, and
classes and courses are open to the SF EMS Agency for scheduled or
unscheduled visits.
4.  Training program staff meets requirements as specified in the State of
California Guidelines for Prehospital Continuing Education.
5.  Award of CE hours, record keeping, certificates and documents,
advertising and sponsorship are done in accordance with the State of
California Guidelines for Prehospital Continuing Education.

C.  CE Provider Renewal

1.  The SF EMS Agency shall renew CE provider approval if all
provisions of the State of California Guidelines for Prehospital Continuing
Education, local policy, and Title 22 are continuously met and an
application with required materials has been submitted.

Page 2

Policy Reference No.: 2060
Effective Date: December 1, 2004

2.  Applications for renewal shall be submitted to the SF EMS Agency at
least 60 calendar days before the date of program expiration in order to
maintain continuous approval.
3.  All CE provider requirements must be met and maintained for
renewal.

V.  CONTINUING EDUCATION COURSE APPROVAL

A.  The following courses have standing approval for an authorized CE Provider
to award prehospital CE hours for students completing the course:

1.  Advanced Cardiac Life Support (ACLS)
2.  Advanced Medical Life Support (AMLS)
3.  Pediatric Advanced Life Support (PALS)
4.  Advanced Pediatric Life Support (APLS)
5.  Pediatric Education for Prehospital Professionals (PEPP)
6.  Prehospital Trauma Life Support (PHTLS)
7.  Basic Trauma Life Support (BTLS)

B.  Other topics that provide a course of study that is directly relevant to the
delivery of prehospital care and/or EMS may be awarded CE for the actual hours
of study without prior approval from the EMS Agency.
C.  Topics with indirect or peripheral application to EMS or prehospital care (i.e.
health and safety training, fire science, etc) must be presented to the EMS
Agency, prior to offering the class, for approval.

1.  The EMS Agency will determine if the topic has relevance to EMS
and, if so, what portion of the total hours may be awarded as prehospital
CE.

D.  Authorized providers may only issue a certificate for the actual hours spent on
a given topic as allowed in California State law.

Page 3

Page 4

