SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

Policy Reference No.: 3000.1
Effective Date: September 9, 2013
Supersedes:  New

MEDICAL DISPATCHER STANDARDS

I.

PURPOSE

To delineate the standards for medical dispatchers working in the San Francisco EMS
system.

II.

POLICY

Every San Francisco EMS System emergency medical dispatcher must meet the
minimum requirements of this policy.

III.  MEDICAL DISPATCHER SCOPE OF PRACTICE

A.  The Medical Dispatcher Scope of Practice includes:

1.  Receive and process calls for emergency medical assistance;
2.  Determine the nature and severity of medical incident calls;
3.  Prioritize the response urgency;
4.  Dispatch the appropriate emergency medical service resource;
5.  Give post-dispatch and pre-arrival instructions to callers at the scene of an

emergency;

6.  Relay pertinent information to responding personnel;
7.  Coordination with public safety and EMS providers as needed, and
8.  Other medical activities as approved by the EMS Agency Medical Director.

IV.

EMERGENCY MEDICAL DISPATCHER REQUIREMENTS

A.  Be employed by the primary Public Safety Answering Point for the City and County

of San Francisco or by a permitted ALS or BLS ambulance company.

B.  Current certification as an Emergency Medical Dispatcher by the National Academy

of Emergency Medical Dispatch.

C.  Current certification in cardio-pulmonary resuscitation (CPR) (public level) from

either the American Heart Association, American Red Cross or American Safety &
Health Institute.

D.  Demonstrated compliance with the Advanced Medical Priority Dispatch standards

including call triage, response assignment, and pre-arrival instructions.

Page 1

Policy Reference No.: 3000.1
Effective Date: September 9, 2013

E.  Demonstrated current knowledge about applicable San Francisco EMS Agency

policies and procedures.

F.  Demonstrated knowledge about the components and operations of the San
Francisco EMS system to adequately meet the operational needs for daily
operations, MCI’s and disasters.

G.  Familiarity with the employer’s internal disaster plans.

H.  Demonstrated proficiency in use of all telecommunications and dispatching

equipment.

v. AUTHORITY

California Health and Safety Code, Sections 1797.220 and 1798(a);
California EMS Authority Publication #132: Emergency Medical Services Dispatch Program
Guidelines, March 2003

Page 2

