SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

Policy Reference No.: 3010
Effective Date: October 1, 2021
Supersedes: August 1, 2007

EMS COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT AND PROCEDURES

I.

 PURPOSE

A.  To prescribe and define EMS communications within the City and County of San
Francisco.
B.  To provide an organized system for communications among all EMS providers during
daily operations, multi-casualty incidents and disasters.

II.  AUTHORITY

A.  California Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, Section 1797.220 and Section 1798(a);
B.  California Code of Regulations, Section 100173(b) (2), 100174(b) (4), 100175(a).

III.  POLICY

A.  All EMS providers shall:

1.  Be responsible for developing and maintaining internal policies and procedures

for regularly scheduled maintenance and prompt repairs of EMS
communications equipment to assure its good working order at all times.
2.  Have internal policies and procedures for communications and staff training

that adhere to the standards set forth in this policy.

3.  Provide adequate training for all new and existing personnel to competently use

all of these forms of communication.

4.  Constantly strive to improve their communications and to directly resolve any

problems affecting communications.

IV. EQUIPMENT

A.  EMS providers are minimally required to have the following communications

equipment:
1.  Ambulance providers:

a)  800 MHz radio system in their dispatch communications centers and in

each ALS and BLS ambulance.

b)  EM Resource in their dispatch communications centers.
c)  Automatic Vehicle Locators in each ALS Ambulances.

2.  Receiving Hospital Emergency Departments and San Francisco General Hospital

Base Hospital:

a)  800 MHz radio system.
b)  HEARNet radio system.
c)  EM Resource.

Page 1

Policy Reference No.: 3010
Effective Date: October 1, 2021

3.  Emergency Communications Department (ECD):

a)  800 MHz radio system,
b)  HEARNet
c)  EM Resource.
d)  Automatic Vehicle Locator

B.  All EMS Providers are encouraged to have cellular telephones, satellite telephones,

and HAM radios available for disaster communications.

V. ROUTINE EMS COMMUNICATIONS PROCEDURES

A.  800 Megahertz Radio Communications:

  1. ECD shall use:

a)  Talk groups FD-A1, A2 and A3 to dispatch San Francisco Fire Department and

Presidio Fire Department ambulances.

b)  Talk group EMS-4/B16 to dispatch private ambulances.

  2. ALS and BLS ambulance units shall use

a)  Talkgroup EMS-1/B13 to notify all Receiving Hospitals, except San Francisco

General Hospital, of in-coming patients.

b)  Talkgroup EMS-2/B14 to notify San Francisco General Hospital Emergency

Department of in-coming patients or for Base Hospital contacts.

  3. Receiving hospital nursing personnel shall answer radio calls from in-coming
ambulance units and respond to daily communication checks by the ECD using the
emergency department 800 MHz base station.

  4. Standard radio procedures using plain English (no 10-codes) shall be used by hospital
and ambulance personnel while communicating on the radio.

B.  EM Resource Communications:

  1. ECD shall use EM Resource for:

a)  Ascertaining hospital diversion status in accordance with EMS Agency Diversion

Policy.

b)  Poll hospitals to ascertain Emergency Department bed availability and poll

ambulance providers for the number of available ambulances during daily EMS
communication checks.

  2. Receiving Hospitals shall use EM Resource for:

a)  Posting current hospital diversion status to the ECD and ambulance providers in

accordance with EMS Agency Policies.

b)  Monitoring for EMS Agency or Department of Public Health Communicable

Disease Control advisory communications.

Page 2

Policy Reference No.: 3010
Effective Date: October 1, 2021

c)  Posting Emergency Department bed availability during daily EMS

communication checks done by ECD.

C.  Hospital Emergency Administrative Radio Network (HEARNet)

1.  The HEARNet is not used during routine EMS communications.
2.  See Section VII for HEARNet’s use during MCI Level 2 and 3 disaster operations.

       D. Automatic Vehicle Locator (AVL)

The Emergency Communications Department shall dispatch the closest public or private
ALS ambulance as indicated by the AVL system to all Code 3 requests for EMS services.

VI. MULTI-CASUALTY INCIDENTS (MCI-Level 1) COMMUNICATIONS PROCEDURES

A.  800 Megahertz Radios will be used similarly as for routine communications, with the

following exceptions:

1.  The ECD shall assign ambulance units to specific talk groups as necessary.
2.  The ECD shall initiate an all-call announcement to receiving hospitals when a MCI

occurs.

3.  Ambulances transporting MCI patients originating from the incident are not

required to provide advance notification to emergency departments or to contact
the Base Hospital for those patients.

4.  Hospital emergency departments should anticipate receiving ambulance
transports of unannounced patients originating from the MCI incident.

     B.  EM Resource

1.  The ECD shall use EM Resource to alert EMS Providers that a MCI is in progress on
the system alert line and as the primary mode for hospital polling to ascertain
Emergency Department bed availability for immediate, delayed and minor patients.
ECD staff shall report this information to the MCI Incident Commander(s).
2.  Receiving Hospitals shall use EM Resource to report emergency department bed

availability for immediate, delayed and minor patients to the Emergency
Communications Department.

3.  Provide a dedicated web enabled computer to display EM Resource on a continuous

24-hour per day basis.

    C.   Automatic Vehicle Locator (AVL)

The Emergency Communications Department shall dispatch the closest public or private
ALS ambulances as indicated by the AVL system to the MCI

Page 3

Policy Reference No.: 3010
Effective Date: October 1, 2021

VII. DISASTER SITUATIONS (MCI Level 2 & Level 3)

A.  800 MHz Radios will be used similarly as for routine communications, with the following

exceptions:

1.  The ECD shall assign ambulance units and other relevant responders to specific

talk groups as necessary.

2.  The ECD shall initiate an all-call announcement to alert receiving hospitals.
3.  Ambulances transporting patients are not required to provide advance notification
to emergency departments or to contact the Base Hospital. Hospital emergency
departments should anticipate receiving ambulance transports of unannounced
patients.

4.  In the event the 800 MHz radio system should fail, or gridlock, at any time, the

system will default to the “failsoft” mode, which allows for ongoing
communications at a reduced level.  This also means that only one conversation
can happen at a time instead of the normal “trunked” system of handling many
conversations simultaneously on different talk groups.  Talk-groups will now be
shared with other users in the “failsoft” mode. The ECD will advise users that the
system is in Fail Soft mode. During Fail Soft, the 800 MHz radio must only be used
for critical communications delivered in a brief and succinct format.

      B.   EM Resource

1.  The ECD shall use EM Resource to alert EMS Providers that a disaster is in progress
on the system alert line and as the primary mode for hospital polling to ascertain
Emergency Department bed availability for immediate, delayed and minor patients.
ECD staff shall report this information to the MCI Incident Commander(s).
2.  Receiving Hospitals shall use EM Resource to report emergency department bed

availability for immediate, delayed and minor patients to the Emergency
Communications Department and as a primary mode for hospital command center
reporting to the EOC/DOC the in-patient bed availability for patients from the
disaster scene.

3.  The city Emergency Operations Center (EOC) and Department of Public Health –
Department Operations Center (DPH DOC) shall use the EM Resource system to
obtain the number of available, staffed in-patient beds.

    C.    HEARNet

1.  The HEARNet radio system is used for communications among receiving hospitals,
the blood bank, the ECD and the EOC or DPH DOC to report facility damage and
requirements for emergency assistance, supplies and personnel and if resources
permit, notify receiving hospitals of the number and severity of incoming patients
during the course of a disaster.

2.  The ECD will initiate an all-call announcement to the receiving hospitals when an

MCI occurs.

3.  The EMS Agency, through the EOC or DPH DOC, may initiate and maintain

communications through the HEARNet.

Page 4

Policy Reference No.: 3010
Effective Date: October 1, 2021

    D.   Land Lines (Telephone)

1.  Each receiving hospital shall maintain a conventional land line in their command

center solely dedicated to communication with the Department of Public Health’s
Department Operations Center (DOC). Each receiving hospital shall notify the EMS
Agency of the number.

2.  The EMS Agency shall inform all receiving hospitals of the contact phone numbers at

the DPH DOC.

VIII. BLOOD BANK COMMUNICATIONS

A.  The Blood Centers of the Pacific – Irwin Center shall use the 800 MHZ radio and HEAR

Net radio system during a disaster for:

1.  Back up communications to and from hospitals for blood and blood product

requests.

2.  Reporting the DPH DOC the available inventory of blood and blood products and

notification of inventory shortages.

3.  Reporting to the Emergency Operations Center / Department Operations Center

blood availability.

IX. QUALITY ASSURANCE

A.  All EMS providers shall assure compliance with this policy through their own quality
assurance plans.
B.  The EMS Agency may randomly check recorded EMS calls and periodically visit
providers to assure compliance with this policy.
C.  The EMS Agency will investigate unusual occurrence reports pertaining to EMS
communications and make recommendations as appropriate.

Page 5

