SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

Policy Reference No.:  3011
Effective Date: September 1, 2009
Review Date: January 1, 2011
Supersedes: August 1, 2007

 COMMUNICATION DRILLS

I.  PURPOSE

A.
B.

To ensure the integrity of all EMS System communications equipment.
To ensure training for all communications equipment users.

II.  AUTHORITY

A.  California Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, Section 1797.220 and Section
1798(a);
B.  California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9, Sections 100173-100175.

III. POLICY

A.  The Division of Emergency Communications (DEC) shall perform regular
communication checks at intervals determined by the EMS Agency.  These
communication checks shall include:

1.  The 800 MHz system to the blood bank.
2.  The EM Resource MCI polling feature to poll hospitals for available
Emergency Department beds and ambulance providers for available
ambulances.

3.  HEARNet radio system roll call of all receiving hospitals, the blood bank,
Laguna Honda Hospital, the National Park Service, the EOC, and the EMS
Agency.

4.  Other communication equipment as determined by the EMS Agency.

B. All tests shall be documented by the DEC using forms designed for this purpose.
These forms shall indicate the date and time of the test, the DEC staff member
conducting the test, and the response or non-response of each hospital or facility.  These
forms shall be retained for one year. The DEC shall forward the forms to the EMS
Agency after each drill.

C. The EMS Agency is responsible for evaluating the system test performance indicators and
implementing performance improvement actions to ensure a functioning emergency
communications system.

Page 1 of 1

