SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

Policy Reference No.:  3020
Effective Date: October 1, 2021
Supersedes: October 29, 2018

FIELD TO HOSPITAL COMMUNICATIONS

I.

PURPOSE

To establish standards for field to hospital notifications and reporting for in-coming
ambulance patients from the 911 system and communications with the Base Hospital.

II.

POLICY

A.  Communications between field personnel, Receiving Hospital personnel, Field

Supervisors, and Base Hospital Physicians shall adhere to the standards presented
within this policy. Any operational reporting guidelines required by an ambulance
provider shall be consistent with the guidelines noted in this policy.

B.  Under no circumstances shall the Receiving Hospital physician or nursing personnel
provide medical direction to field personnel or refuse to accept an EMS ambulance
patient.

C.  Interfacility transfers pre-arranged with a physician and hospital are excluded from
advance notification except in situations where the patient has unexpectedly
deteriorated and requires immediate care in the emergency department.

D.  Refer to EMS Agency Policy #8000 EMS MCI Plan for suspension of Receiving Hospital or

Base Hospital contact in the event of a multi-casualty incident (MCI).

III.

CRITICAL ALERTS

A.  Critical Alerts are brief alert notifications for shock trauma, STEMI, stroke, critical pediatric
or compromised airway patients intended to alert Emergency Department staff and other
in-patient services (trauma, cardiology, neurology, anesthesia, respiratory therapy) about
time sensitive conditions where definitive treatment is beyond the Emergency Department.
Critical alerts are not subject to interrogation by the receiving facility; acknowledgement of
receipt is all that is required. Full patient report is to be done after ED arrival. The format for
critical alerts is in Attachment A.

B.  Field personnel must make a reasonable effort to do critical alerts prior to the ambulance
departing the scene. The transporting paramedic may do the alert or may designate
another field responder to do it. It is within the scope of EMTs to make these calls.

C.  Provide early critical alerts to Emergency Departments for the following:

Page 1

Policy Reference No.:  3020
Effective Date: October 1, 2021

1.  Shock Trauma Alert: To Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital (ZSFG) for any
patient with a major mechanism of injury from blunt or penetrating trauma as
determined by the paramedic AND severe hemorrhagic shock with either SBP < 90 or
absent peripheral pulses.

2.  STEMI Alerts: To STAR Centers for patients meeting STEMI (STAR) Center destination

criteria (per Policy 5000 Ambulance Destination). EKG transmission to STAR centers shall
precede STEMI Alerts.

3.  Stroke Alerts: To Stroke Centers for patients meeting Stroke Center destination criteria

(per Policy 5000 Ambulance Destination).

4.  Critical Pediatric Alert: to Pediatric Critical Care Centers for patients meeting the

Pediatric Critical Care destination criteria (per Policy 5000 Ambulance Destination)

5.  Compromised Airway Alert: to a Receiving Hospital when transporting a patient with an

acutely compromised airway needing further immediate care.

IV.  HOSPITAL NOTIFICATION PATIENT REPORTS

A.  Field personnel shall provide hospital notification patient reports for ALL patient transports
to an Emergency Department except Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital that have
not required a Critical Alert per IIIC above. The format for Hospital Notification Patient
Reports is in Appendix B.

B.  Hospital notification patient reports to Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital are

limited to the following:

1.  Shock Trauma Alerts
2.  STEMIs/Post Arrest ROSC
3.  Stroke
4.  Other patients trauma meeting trauma triage criteria
5.  Other critical medical or special circumstances (e.g. hazmat, etc.) at paramedic

discretion

V.

BASE HOSPITAL PHYSICIAN CONTACT

A.  Field personnel shall document contacts with Base Hospital Physicians on the prehospital

care record (PCR).

B.  Prehospital personnel shall contact the Base Hospital Physician for treatment authorization

or medical consultation for any of the following circumstances:
1.  Prior to administering any drug or initiating any treatment that requires Base Hospital

Physician contact according to the EMS Agency Protocol Manual.

Page 2

Policy Reference No.:  3020
Effective Date: October 1, 2021

2.  Any questions or clarifications regarding the appropriate destination or specialty care

receiving facility for a patient.

3.  Any patient whose care requires deviation from the EMS Agency Treatment Protocols.
4.  Any patient in which an on-scene physician wishes to assume total responsibility for

medical care.

5.  Any patient refusal that requires Base Hospital contact in accordance with Policy #4040

Procedure and Documentation for Non-Transported Patients.

6.  Any patient, who in the paramedic’s judgement, would benefit from a Base Hospital

physician medical consultation.

7.  The format for Base Hospital Physician consultation is in Attachment C: (Full) Report
Elements for In-Coming EMS Patients or Base Hospital Contact, per Policy 4040
Procedure and Documentation for Non Transported Patients.

C.  The Base Hospital physician shall provide medical consultation for prehospital personnel in
accordance with EMS Agency Policy 5011 Base Hospital Standards and all other applicable
EMS Agency policies and protocols.

D.  After the prehospital personnel have made Base Hospital physician contact, the personnel
shall then notify the Receiving Hospital of any patient enroute to that facility.  In rare
circumstances  the prehospital personnel’s respective dispatch center shall relay this
information if they are unable to do so.

VI.  HOSPITAL AND FIELD RADIO GUIDELINES FOR CALLS

1.  Use plain English during radio communications.
2.  Make reasonable efforts to minimize voice radio traffic.

•  Receiving Hospital personnel and Base Hospital Physicians should avoid requesting

information from Field Personnel that is not essential.

•  Receiving Hospital personnel and Base Hospital physicians shall repeat reports only

when the transmission is unclear.

VII.

FIELD RADIO COMMUNICATION FAILURE

In the event of radio communication failure in the field, the field personnel’s respective
dispatch center shall relay information from the field personnel to the Receiving Hospital as
needed according to the approved reporting guidelines.

VIII.

AUTHORITY

California Health and Safety Code 1797.204 and 1797.220.
California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Sections 100173-100175.

Page 3

Policy Reference No.:  3020
Effective Date: October 1, 2021

ATTACHMENT A: (BRIEF) CRITICAL ALERT GUIDELINES

CRITICAL ALERT

Critical Alert Elements:
1.  Confirm hospital
2.  Ambulance provider and unit number.
3.  Reason for the critical alert (definition listed below):

A.  Shock trauma
B.  STEMI
C.  Stroke
D.  Critical Pediatric
E.  Compromised airway

4.  Patient age and gender
5.  Alert Criteria (definition listed below):

A.  Shock trauma: MOI plus signs of hemorrhagic shock, e.g. SBP<90 or absent

peripheral pulses

B.  STEMI criteria: EKG with evidence of acute STEMI
C.  Stroke: Cincinnati stroke scale result and time last seen normal
D.  Critical Pediatric: post cardiac arrest, status epilepticus, hypotension with shock, or

acute deteriorating level of consciousness without trauma

E.  Compromised airway: critical need for further treatment to secure airway

6.  Estimated time of arrival (ETA)
7.  Confirm message reception

Shock Trauma Alert: To ZSFG for patients with a major mechanism of injury from blunt or
penetrating trauma as determined by the paramedic AND severe hemorrhagic shock with either
SBP < 90 or absent peripheral pulses.

STEMI Alert: To STAR Centers for patients meeting STAR Center destination criteria. Must
include EKG transmissions prior to STEMI alert notification.

Stroke Alert: To Stroke Centers for patients meeting Stroke destination criteria.

Critical Pediatric: To Pediatric Critical Care Centers for patients meeting PCCC destination
criteria.

Compromised Airway: To a Receiving Hospital for patients with a critical airway need per
ambulance destination policy

NOTE: Full reports at given at the bedside after arrival.

Page 4

Policy Reference No.:  3020
Effective Date: October 1, 2021

ATTACHMENT B: HOSPITAL REPORT GUIDELINES FOR OTHER EMS PATIENTS (Not Shock
Trauma/STEMI/Stroke/Critical Pediatric or Compromised Airway)

All Reports:

1.  Start with name of hospital you are trying to contact.
2.  Name of ambulance company and unit number.
3.  Patient age and gender.
4.  Go to MIVT formats below for trauma or medical calls:

Trauma MIVT Format:

•  Mechanism of injury (MOI)
•

Injuries sustained (Sign and symptoms; pertinent positive/negative physical
findings/special consideration e.g. hazmat, violent, etc.)

•  Vital signs
•  Treatment rendered including response to treatment. (Estimated) Time of

Arrival

Medical MIVT Format:

•  Medical Condition (Patient chief complaint)
•

Illness (Sign and symptoms; pertinent positive/negative physical findings/special
consideration e.g. hazmat, violent, etc.)

•  Vital signs
•  Treatment rendered including response to treatment. (Estimated) Time of

Arrival

5.  ETA
6.  Confirm receipt

Page 5

ATTACHMENT C:  REPORT GUIDELINES FOR BASE HOSPITAL PHYSICIAN CONSULATION

Policy Reference No.:  3020
Effective Date: October 1, 2021

All Base Calls:

1.  Ambulance Company name and unit ID number
2.  Prehospital provider ID
3.  Incident number
4.  Purpose of the consultation
5.  Patient age and gender
6.  Location found
7.  Patient chief complaint
8.  Vital signs
9.  Blood glucose and ECG findings if relevant
10. Patient assessment, pertinent physical exam
11. Pertinent past medical history
12. Capacity assessment findings
13. Patient’s plan for care if any
14. Prehospital provider’s opinion for disposition

Page 6

