SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

Policy Reference No.:   4000
Effective Date: September 1, 2011
Review Date: January 1, 2013
Supersedes: August 1, 2007

PREHOSPITAL PROVIDER STANDARDS

I.

PURPOSE

A.  To establish standards for EMS providers that supports the seamless delivery of high quality
prehospital care and ambulance transportation to the residents and visitors of San Francisco,
from a patient’s perspective.

B.  To define the roles of each category of participant within the EMS System and identify the
parameters within which those providers will conduct their business.

II.

AUTHORITY

A.  California Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, Sections 1797.200, 1797.201,1797.204,
1797.206, 1797.220, 1797.224, 1797.252, and 1798.

B.  California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Sections 100063 et seq., 100142, 100145, 100147,
100173, 100175, and 100254(f).

C.  City and County of San Francisco Health Code, Article 14

III.

POLICY

A.  General Requirements for all EMS providers:

1.  EMS providers operating in San Francisco will comply with all Federal, State, and

local laws pertaining to the operation of ambulances and emergency vehicles, and the
delivery of prehospital care and medical transportation.

2.  EMS providers shall comply with all EMS Agency Policies and Procedures and

Protocols.

3.  All EMS providers shall have and enforce a policy that prohibits employees from

performing any ALS or BLS service under the influence of any alcoholic beverage,
illegal drug, or narcotic. In addition, said policy shall prohibit employees from
performing such services under the influence of any other substances, including
prescription or non-prescription medications, which impairs their physical or mental
performance.

4.  Pursuant to 22 CCR 100254(f), all providers shall have policy requiring early

notification for trauma patients being transported to an EMS designated trauma center

5.  EMS providers responding to requests for service, delivering care, or transporting
patients within the City and County of San Francisco shall have a permit issued by
the San Francisco EMS Agency.

Page 1

Policy Reference No.:    4000
Effective Date: September 1, 2011

6.  Managerial personnel with such authority necessary to act on behalf of the provider
for all operational issues shall be available to the provider’s personnel and the EMS
system 24 hours a day.

7.  EMS Providers will maintain such staffing, equipment, and vehicles as necessary to
be available to respond at all times. Vehicles will be equipped as detailed in the
Vehicle Equipment and Supply list.

8.  EMS Providers will maintain or contract for services with a designated EMS Dispatch
Center operating within the requirements of EMS Agency Policy. All responses shall
be in accordance with the minimum required response associated with the AMPDS
determinant assigned by the designated EMS Dispatch Center.

9.  EMS Providers will maintain capability to communicate directly with the Emergency
Communications Department, using the 800MHz radios, from any vehicle operating
within the City and County of San Francisco.

10. Current EMS Agency Policy and Protocol manuals will be accessible by all

employees at each station and in each permitted vehicle.

11. EMS Providers will allow periodic site visits and vehicle inspections by the EMS

Agency Medical Director, or his/her designee, as part of the EMS Agency
Compliance Verification Process.

12. All EMS providers shall have and enforce a written policy that requires employees to
safely secure any durable medical equipment belonging to a patient about to be
transported to any destination.  Examples include wheel chairs, scooters, portable
oxygen, and any other type of durable medical equipment owned by the patient.  Each
field provider, public or private, shall be responsible for the safekeeping of a patient’s
durable medical equipment.  This does not apply to a patient’s home, or other facility
able to secure the item safely.  Each field provider will give to the patient a written
notice of how the item will be secured and how s/he can retrieve the item of durable
medical equipment when s/he is released from the facility to which they were
transported.  Providers shall not charge the patient for this service or pass the cost
along to the patient at a later time.  Once a field provider has made patient contact,
they will be financially liable for any lost durable medical equipment. Each field
provider shall forward a copy of their policy to the EMS Agency by the effective date
of this policy.

B.  First Responder

1.  No less than one certified EMT-1 shall, at all times, staff each apparatus used for first

response.
a)  SFFD and National Park Service Fire Department are also ALS providers and
may, in accordance with other policies and agreements with the EMS Agency,
staff first response apparatus with ALS equipment and at least one paramedic.
b)  If an ambulance is used for ALS first response, the standards described under “On

Viewed” incidents, V, C shall be used to determine if transport should be
initiated.

2.  SFFD will provide first response services for all presumptively defined life

threatening emergency responses in San Francisco without regard to the ALS
provider responding.

Page 2

Policy Reference No.:    4000
Effective Date: September 1, 2011

a)  SFFD will respond to all requests for on scene assistance made by ALS providers

on emergency calls.

b)  If requested by a transporting unit, first responders will accompany the patient to

the hospital to assist with patient care.

c)  SFFD, at its discretion, may choose to limit response to requests made by

providers for non-emergency purposes, based on the operational needs of the
Department.

C.  BLS Provider

1.  BLS ambulances will be staffed with two certified EMT-1s consistent with the

established personnel and training standards in EMS Agency Policy.

2.  BLS ambulances shall be equipped with an AED and providers shall meet the

requirements of 22 CCR 100063.1.

3.  BLS ambulances may respond to the following requests for service:

a)  Interfacility transfers;
b)  Service requests that have an AMPDS response determinant approved for BLS

response by the EMS Agency Medical Director;

c)  Prearranged medical transportation from a residence or sub-acute facility to a

clinic, medical office, sub-acute facility, or hospital for non-urgent care of a pre-
existing medical condition; and

d)  Multi-Casualty Incidents as described in the Integrated Response Plan.
4.  BLS personnel may provide emergency care within their scope of practice in the

following situations:
a)  When they come across medical emergencies during the normal course of

business (on view) and until relieved by ALS personnel;

b)  When a patient’s clinical condition suddenly deteriorates during transport;
c)  As requested by ALS personnel present on the same emergency scene.
d)  BLS providers will not actively seek out, shadow, or be dispatched to emergency

calls.

e)  BLS providers and personnel may not accept a patient from ALS providers or
personnel for the purposes of unsupervised care and/or transport from an
emergency scene, except during a disaster or MCI when approved by the EMS
Agency Medical Director.

D.  ALS Providers

1.  The City and County of San Francisco is an Exclusive Operating Area (EOA) as

defined in Section 1797.204 of the California Health and Safety Code.

2.  Each Advanced Life Support Provider must have a current Paramedic Service

Provider Agreement with the San Francisco EMS Agency to operate as an authorized
ALS Provider.

3.  ALS Providers will staff Paramedic Field Supervisors as required by EMS Agency

Policy.

4.  ALS Providers shall dispatch, or require to be dispatched, 2 California licensed and

San Francisco accredited paramedics, who may be responding in separate vehicles, to
all AMPDS Response Determinants identified as requiring a dual paramedic response
by the EMS Medical Director.

Page 3

Policy Reference No.:    4000
Effective Date: September 1, 2011

5.  ALS transport vehicles will be staffed with a minimum of one currently licensed and
San Francisco accredited paramedic, and one EMT-1 consistent with the personnel
and training standards in EMS Agency Policy.
a)  A second licensed and San Francisco accredited paramedic may replace the EMT-

1 on a transport vehicle, at the discretion of the provider.

b)  ALS apparatus intended for response only will have a minimum of one currently

licensed and San Francisco accredited paramedic in order to quality as an
authorized ALS resource.

6.  ALS providers will respond to all requests for service in accordance with response

patterns determined by AMPDS and approved by the EMS Agency Medical Director.
This requirement pertains to all emergent, urgent, immediate, and/or unscheduled
requests for service received by any means.

7.  ALS providers will respond an appropriately staffed and equipped ALS vehicle to the

following requests for service:
a)  All service requests  assigned an AMPDS determinant that requires ALS

response;
1)  Those requests with an Echo determinant must be assigned to the closest ALS
response and transport vehicles without preference to any particular provider.
b)  All requests for assistance made by a First Response, Law Enforcement, or BLS

provider;
1)  This provision applies to private ALS providers when they are available in

accordance with the Integrated Response Plan.

8.  At the provider’s discretion, an ALS ambulance may be assigned to requests for

interfacility transports requiring a paramedic in attendance;

9.  At the provider’s discretion, an ALS ambulance may be assigned to any or all

requests outlined in C, 3, a-d.

E.  Quality Improvement & Training
1.  All EMS providers shall prepare and submit to the EMS Agency, a Quality Improvement

plan that complies with State law and EMS Agency Policy.

2.  Providers shall employ a registered nurse, a physician, or a paramedic knowledgeable in
prehospital care and quality improvement who is responsible for the QI oversight in
accordance with EMS Agency Policy.

a)  ALS providers shall employ a physician knowledgeable in prehospital care and

quality improvement to act as a provider Medical Director.

3.  Providers will compile and submit all reports and data as required by Policy and as

requested by the EMS Agency.

4.  Training programs, with mandatory attendance requirements for all employees, structured
from information gained through QI activities will be presented to all employees not less
than 4 times per year.

5.  All employees will receive training, with mandatory attendance requirements, on all EMS

Agency Policy, Procedure, and Protocols.

a)  EMS personnel who are working as professional responders in San Francisco and

fail to attend training mandated by the EMS Medical Director, may, at the
direction of the EMS Medical Director, have their certification or accreditation
suspended and be subject to disciplinary action, up to an including revocation of

Page 4

Policy Reference No.:    4000
Effective Date: September 1, 2011

their certification or accreditation for failing to attend training mandated by the
EMS Medical Director.

6.  Providers will develop a new employee training process that meets the current personnel

and training standards in EMS Agency Policy.

F.  Response Standards and Goals

1.  The entire EOA of the City and County of San Francisco is defined as a

“metropolitan and urban” area.

2.  The dispatch interval will be measured from the time an incident is created in the

provider’s computer aided dispatch computer until a response vehicle is notified of
the call.

3.  Response intervals will be measured from the time assigned vehicle is notified of an

incident until the responding vehicle stops at the scene.

4.  While recognizing that the current San Francisco EMS System is not yet capable of
meeting them, the EMS Agency has identified that the EMDAC recommended
Response Time Intervals are a worthy goal, and will evaluate and improve the San
Francisco EMS System by using the following Response Call Intervals, as
recommended by EMDAC, as benchmarks:

a)  BLS with AED on scene – 5 minutes from time of first ring at primary PSAP

to vehicle arrival at the scene with the wheels stopped.

b)  ALS – 10 minutes from time of first ring at primary PSAP to vehicle arrival at

the scene with the wheels stopped.

c)  Patient Transport Vehicle – 12 minutes from time of first ring at primary

PSAP to vehicle arrival at the scene with the wheels stopped.
5.  Emergency Dispatch Centers shall ensure that an appropriate AMPDS response

determinant is assigned and the approved response vehicles for that determinant are
notified of the assignment within 2 minutes, 0 seconds 90 percent of the time for all
presumptively defined life threatening emergencies.

6.  The SFFD shall ensure that responders capable of performing Basic Life Support and
Defibrillation are on scene of all presumptively defined life-threatening emergencies
within 4 minutes and 30 seconds, 90 percent of the time as measured each month
within the Emergency Response Districts. The SFFD shall be responsible for
complying with this response interval requirement for all presumptively defined life-
threatening emergencies, including those calls responded to by other Emergency
Ground Ambulance Providers on a mutual aid or IRP request.

7.  Providers shall ensure that responders capable of performing Advanced Life Support
are on the scene of all presumptively defined life threatening emergencies within 7
minutes and 0 seconds, 90 percent of the time as measured each month within the
Emergency Response Districts.

a)  Private ALS Providers may request the SFFD to assign an ALS First
Response Company as needed to comply with this requirement.

b)  The SFFD shall respond an ALS First Response Company when requested by

other Emergency Ground Ambulance Providers on a mutual aid or IRP
request.

c)  All time intervals shall be indexed from the time the incident was created at

the initiating agency.

Page 5

Policy Reference No.:    4000
Effective Date: September 1, 2011

1)  Each involved agency will reference the index time but report their

response separately.

8.  Providers shall ensure that a Patient Transportation Capable Vehicle, staffed by at

least 2 personnel including one paramedic and permitted as an ALS ambulance by the
EMS Agency, is on the scene of all presumptively defined life threatening
emergencies within 10 minutes, 0 seconds 90 percent of time as measured each month
within the Emergency Response Districts.

9.  Providers shall ensure that a Patient Transport Capable Vehicle, staffed by at least 2
people including one paramedic and permitted as an ALS ambulance by the EMS
Agency is on the scene of all Code 2 dispatches within 20 minutes, 0 seconds 90
percent of the time as measured each month within the Emergency Response
Districts.

10. If a response is appropriately changed from code 3 to code 2 enroute to the scene, the
entire response time interval shall be calculated against the standard for a code 2
response, except in those cases in which the response has be reduced to code 2 after
exceeding the code 3 response time standard.

11. If a response is changed from code 2 to code 3 enroute to the scene, the entire
response time shall be calculated against the standard for a code 3 response.

a)  Providers shall file an exception report, and these incidents shall not be

included the response time standards calculations.

12. The response interval standard applies only to the first unit of each category to arrive
on scene. The response unit categories are 1) responder capable of performing BLS
and Defibrillation, 2) responder capable of performing ALS and, 3) patient
transportation capable vehicle.

13. For non-emergency patients being cared for by a physician or RN requesting transport

to an ED or for direct hospital admit the call taker may use Card 33A –
Transfer/Interfacility/Palliative Care under the following rules:

a)  If the call taker is not able to speak directly with someone who is physically

with the patient and is not able to verify that a physician or RN has examined
the patient, then the call taker shall switch to another appropriate card for a
Code 2 or 3 dispatch;

b)  That the physician or RN confirms that for Card 33A Acuity Level I

responses, that a 60-minute response time is appropriate.

c)  That the physician or RN confirms that for Card 33A Acuity Level II

responses, that a 4 hour response time is appropriate.

d)  For non-emergency calls originating from a third party who is not at the
patient location, such as a transport hub or institutional security, Card 33
cannot be used unless the call taker is provided with a phone number for
contacting the RN or MD on scene with the patient;

e)  The call taker does not need permission from the physician or RN to upgrade

the response to Code 2 or 3.

f)  If a private ambulance provider cannot respond within 60-minutes to a Card

33 Alpha, Acuity I, the ambulance provider shall attempt to transfer the call to
another permitted private provider. Only if another provider is unavailable, the
call shall be transferred to the San Francisco 911 Center;

Page 6

Policy Reference No.:    4000
Effective Date: September 1, 2011

g)  San Francisco ALS providers may refer 33A, Acuity Level II calls to a

permitted BLS provider for service;

14. The following summarizes the Response Time Requirements described above:

Vehicle Response

Dispatch
Interval

Response Time Interval

(AMPDS determinants are
representative only and
subject to modification on
approval of EMS Medical
Director)
Code 3 (Red lights
and siren)
AMPDS Echo, Delta, some
Charlie, and some Bravo
determinants
Code 2
(no red lights or siren)
AMPDS Alpha, some Bravo,
and some Charlie
determinants

Code 1
Only for Card 33A
Acuity LI
NonUrgent
Only for Card 33A
Acuity LII

BLS & AED
On Scene

ALS On Scene  Transport On

Scene

2 minutes

4 minutes, 30
seconds

7 minutes, 0
seconds

ALS 10 minutes,
0 seconds

2 minutes

NA

20 minutes, 0
seconds

ALS 20 minutes,
0 seconds

2 minutes

NA

NA

NA

60 minutes
BLS or ALS if
BLS unavailable

4 hours
BLS

60 minutes
ALS responds only if
any question exists or
BLS unavailable
4 hours
ALS responds only if
any question exists or
BLS unavailable.
ALS providers may
refer caller to
permitted BLS
provider.

15. Response time and interval reporting

a)  Providers shall report all response time data to the EMS Agency through an

“incident based reporting system,” by which the response of first responders and
ambulances and other vehicles are recorded, as indexed to a request for service.
b)  For each request for emergency medical service, Providers shall record or cause

to be recorded the incident location and the times for each responding unit at each
of the stages of a response:
1)  For each ALS or BLS First Response vehicle the SFFD shall record:

(a)  Time incident created in CAD;
(b) Time unit notified;
(c)  Time response unit was mobile;
(d) Time vehicle stopped at scene;
(e)  Time arrived at patient’s side;
(f)  Scene departure time; and
(g) Available time.

Page 7

2)  For each responding ambulance, the provider shall record:

Policy Reference No.:    4000
Effective Date: September 1, 2011

(a)  Time incident created in CAD;
(b) Time unit notified;
(c)  Time response unit was mobile;
(d) Time vehicle stopped at scene;
(e)  Time arrived at patient’s side;
(f)  Scene departure time;
(g) Destination arrival time; and
(h) Available time.

3)  Providers shall also record the response code to the incident location, the
destination/disposition of each vehicle, and the response code to the
destination for transported patients.

4)  Response times shall be measured and reported by the geographic boundaries
of each Emergency Response District. Response times shall also be measured
and reported in the aggregate.

5)  All response times and interval measurements shall be measured and reported

monthly in an electronic format approved by the EMS Agency.

IV.

PROCEDURE

A.  Ambulance Permit Process

1.  Obtain the Application for Ambulance Permit from the EMS Agency offices and

submit the completed application and required documentation.

2.  Pay the required fee.
3.  Make the ambulance(s) and operations facilities available for inspection by the EMS

Agency.

4.  No ambulance shall be operated within San Francisco without a permit from the EMS

Agency

B.  Compliance Verification

1.  In order to verify continuing compliance with EMS Agency Policy, the EMS Agency
will periodically perform site surveys for the purposes of inspection and evaluation of
a providers policies and practices. If a provider agency fails to attain a passing score
on any site survey, the EMS Agency shall notify that agency in writing of
deficiencies.

2.  The provider agency will develop a corrective action plan submit it to the EMS

Agency within 30 days of notification

a)  Plan will address all noted deficiencies;
b)  Plan will include proposed timeframe for correction; and
c)  Plan must be approved by the EMS Agency Medical Director.

3.  If determined as necessary by the EMS Agency Medical Director, the EMS Agency
shall resurvey the provider in no less than 90 days from the date of notification.
4.  If, as determined by the EMS Agency Medical Director, there exist circumstances
deemed to jeopardize public health and safety, the EMS Agency Medical director
may:
a)  Require that the provider agency suspend all operations until such time that

corrections are made and verified; and

Page 8

Policy Reference No.:    4000
Effective Date: September 1, 2011

b)  Resurvey the provider agency in less than 90 days

5.  Failure to correct noted deficiencies shall be cause for any or all of the following

actions:
a)  Revocation of the provider agencies ambulance permit and/or Paramedic Service

Provider agreement.

b)  Placing the provider agency on a probationary status during which time the

provider agency will follow an approved corrective action plan and be closely
monitored for compliance.

Page 9

