SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY

MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

EFFECTIVE DATE: 10/1/25

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 4001

SUPERSEDES: 2/3/20

VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS

1.  PURPOSE

1.1.  To establish consistent minimum equipment and supplies standards for Basic Life Support,

Advanced Life Support Medical Response Vehicles and Mobile Assistance Teams (MAT) in the
City and County of San Francisco.

2.  POLICY

2.1.  This policy does not supersede the California Vehicle Code or the California Code of

Regulations requirements for ambulance equipment.

2.2.  All Medical Response Vehicles shall be inspected by the EMS Agency to receive a permit to

operate in the City and County of San Francisco. Inspections shall be done at the time of
issuing the initial permit.
2.2.1.  For subsequent permits, Ambulance Providers shall inspect each Medical Response

Vehicles on an annual basis.

2.2.2.  Annual renewal process begins July 1 and ends with permits being issued on October 1

of each ﬁscal year:
2.2.2.1.  Ambulance providers will submit:

•  Signed Aﬃdavit (signatures to be from supervisor or higher authorized

person)

•  Ambulance master list;
•  Copy of CHP Inspection or Certiﬁcate;
•  Copy of DMV registration (City Exempt);
•  Copy of insurance.

2.2.2.2.  Ambulance master list submitted will also have self-inspection performed and
date. Self-inspection period runs from July 1 – August 15 each year.
2.2.2.3.  August 15 – September 1: the EMS Agency will review and verify all

documentation and send out an invoice for payment.

2.2.2.4.  September 1 – September 30: Ambulance providers will provide the EMS

Agency with payment for permits

2.2.2.5.  October 1: permits are issued

2.2.3.  The EMS Agency will randomly inspect Medical Response Vehicles for compliance

throughout the permit cycle.

1

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 4001

EFFECTIVE DATE: 10/1/25

2.2.4.  Medical Response Vehicles must demonstrate compliance to the equipment standards

in this policy to qualify for a permit. Any Medical Response Vehicle not in compliance
with the equipment standards policy shall be taken out of service until such
compliance is met.

2.2.5.  Specialty Vehicles will not be permitted but can be inspected for compliance by EMS

Agency.

2.3.  All Medical Response Vehicles and MATs shall minimally stock the equipment and supplies as

listed in the attachments to this policy.  Actual quantities stocked should take into
consideration the amounts typically used in a shift(s) plus additional quantities to maintain
adequate supplies for periods of high demand or restocking delays.

2.4.  Medical Response Vehicles and MATs shall not stock any medications, or medical devices or

equipment that is not approved by the EMS Agency Medical Director.

2.5.  Each ALS and BLS ﬁrst response vehicle, ambulance and supervisory units, shall have an
800MHz radio in compliance with Policy 3010 EMS Communications Equipment and
Procedures and have the ability to communicate with a Base Hospital Physician.
2.6.  Each permitted ambulance company provider shall have a “par-list” check out sheet (or

electronic equivalent) for every Medical Response Vehicle that identiﬁes the minimum supply
and equipment stock required on each unit.  Ambulance companies shall ensure each unit is
inspected prior to deployment or at least once every 24-hour period to verify that the
minimum level of equipment is present on the vehicle. An ambulance provider company
employees shall attest to the completed inspection or electronic equivalent, by signing the
par-list checkout sheet. The ambulance provider company shall maintain this record for six
months.

3.  DEFINITIONS

3.1.  Medical Response Vehicles – Generic term for any Advanced Life Support (ALS) or Basic Life
Support (BLS) Response vehicle that responds to a request for medical service. This includes,
but is not limited to:
3.1.1.  BLS transport/non-transport unit (First Response)
3.1.2.  ALS transport/non-transport unit (First Response)

3.2.  Quick-Response Vehicle (QRV) - Response vehicle, usually staﬀed by a paramedic supervisor,
and may provide ﬁeld supervision and coordination for EMS ﬁeld crews. If no paramedic
supervisor is staﬃng the vehicle, a QRV may provide supplemental ﬁeld response and patient
care. This vehicle does not have the ability to transport patients.

3.3.  MAT (ALS or BLS) - Generic term for mobile (roving) non-ambulance-based EMTs and/or

Paramedics deployed at special events. MAT must be able to provide, AT MINIMUM, First Aid
Care at an EMT level, and must have communication capability, by radio, cell phone, or other
medium. Each MAT must carry at least one (1) Automatic External Deﬁbrillator (AED) or

2

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 4001

EFFECTIVE DATE: 10/1/25

cardiac monitor at all times. At least one (1) full MCI Kit, as referenced on Page 18-19, must be
present at the event.
3.3.1.  Bike Team
3.3.2.  Gator/Cart Team
3.3.3.  Water-Based Team
3.3.4.  Community Paramedicine Vehicle, etc.

3.4.  Alternate Medications – In the event of a medication shortage as determined by EMSA,

alternate medications may be stocked and utilized as outlined in 4001a Table 2.

4.  AUTHORITY

4.1.  San Francisco Health Code, Article 14, Section 903
4.2.  California Vehicle Code, Section 2500 – 2505
4.3.  California Health and Safety Code, Section 1797.220
4.4.  California Code of Regulations, Title 13, Division 2, Chapter 5, Article 1, § 1100
4.5.  San Francisco EMS Policy #7010

3

