SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

Policy Reference No.: 4010

Effective Date: August 1, 2008
Review Date:  January 1, 2011

Supersedes: August 1, 2007

INTEGRATED RESPONSE PLAN

I.  PURPOSE

A.  Establish a mechanism by which permitted private ALS providers may
participate in the 911 system in order to augment system resources.
B.  To provide a uniform method of contacting private ALS ambulances during
normal and disaster operations.
C.  To provide a method to incorporate permitted BLS ambulances into EMS
Operations during a disaster when authorized by the EMSA Medical Director.

II.  AUTHORITY

A.  California Health & Safety Code, Division 2.5, Sections 1797.204,
1797.206, 1797.220, 1797.224, 1797.250, and 1797.252
B.  Title 22, California Code of Regulations Sections 100147, 1001473,
and 100175
C.  City and County of San Francisco Health Code, Article 14

III. POLICY

A.  The Division of Emergency Communications (DEC) shall dispatch the
closest properly staffed and permitted ALS ambulance regardless of
agency affiliation as indicated by the AVL system to all code 3 requests
for EMS service.
B.  The EMS Agency will initially equip all ALS units with a GPS
transmitter capable of communicating a unit’s identifier and location to
DEC.  Any upgrades or changes to this system will be provided to the
private field Providers by DEC.
C.  The transmitter will be enabled when available for assignment by
DEC.

1.  It is the responsibility of the private ALS unit to notify the
private provider’s dispatch when assigned to a call by DEC.
D.  Private ALS units will communicate directly with DEC using the
800MHz radios on the currently assigned channels and/or the MDT.
E.  All calls with an AMPDS determinant of Echo, Delta and Charlie will
be dispatched to the closest ALS transport unit, regardless of receiving
provider or caller origin.
F.  Calls with AMPDS determinants of Bravo or Alpha will be assigned to
a unit capable of meeting the current response time requirements.
Preference may be given to a provider’s own unit if the unit is capable of

Page 1

Policy Reference No.: 4010
Effective Date: August 1, 2008

meeting the response time requirement, otherwise a closer unit, without
preference to a provider, must be sent.
G.  During a declared MCI, Private ALS providers will suspend using
ALS units on non-urgent calls, making those units available for
assignment using the standard methods described below.

1. If the MCI is isolated and/or the Private ALS providers will not
be needed to manage incident or system calls while the MCI is
ongoing, the EMS Agency may allow the Private ALS providers to
resume normal operations while the incident is ongoing.
H.  During a MCI or disaster in which public and private ALS resources
are likely to be overwhelmed and medical mutual aid is unavailable or
insufficient, the EMS Agency Medical Director may require that permitted
BLS providers suspend non-urgent calls and make those units available to
the EMS System.

1.   Direct communication with DEC will be enabled and
conducted via the 800MHz radio.
2.  It will be the responsibility of the BLS ambulance to
communicate assignments received from DEC to the provider
dispatcher.
3.  Utilization of BLS units will be only for the duration of the
declared incident and assigned duties that are directly related to the
declared incident.

a)   BLS units will not be utilized to respond to EMS calls
that are received through normal channels and are
otherwise considered part of the normal daily activities of
the EMS System.

IV. PROCEDURE

A.  When available to DEC, the unit will enable the transmitter and begin
sending location and identifier.
B.  When not available to DEC, the unit will disable the transmitter to
avoid erroneous recommendation by the CAD.
C.  If an ALS unit receives simultaneous assignments from the Provider
dispatch and the DEC, or if a unit does not disable the transmitter when
enroute to a private call and is subsequently assigned a call by the DEC,
the unit will respond to the higher priority call.

1.  The ALS unit is responsible for notifying the private dispatch
center and DEC of the situation and the call to which they are
responding.
2.  The crew of the ALS unit is required to file a UO with the
EMS Agency within 24 hours.

D.  Communications with DEC shall be done using the 800MHz radios on
the currently assigned channels, or the MDT.

1.  The Private ALS unit will advise DEC of the following:

a)  Acknowledge receipt of assignment;

Page 2

Policy Reference No.: 4010
Effective Date: August 1, 2008

b)  On scene;
c)  Call disposition (i.e., transport, refusal, and cancel on
scene).

2.  In the event of radio failure, the Private ALS unit will
communicate with the DEC through the Private ALS unit’s
dispatch.

E.  When approved by the EMS Medical Director or Administrator
assigned to a declared MCI or disaster.

1.  Once on scene of the declared incident, BLS units will be
assigned appropriate duties and roles as determined by the Incident
Commander and the Medical Group Supervisor.

a)  Duties and roles may include transport of delayed or
moderate patients determined as stable by ALS personnel
on scene.

V. IMPLEMENTATION

Until such time as technology is implemented to allow the use of

Technology issues will be addressed through a joint workgroup

A.
that includes the affected providers, the ECD, and the EMS Agency.
B.
the GPS transmitters and CAD recommendations, the private ALS unit
will notify Dispatch of their availability either by the MDT or by 800
MHz radio.
C.

All other parts of this policy are effective as written.

Page 3

