SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

Policy Reference No.:  4020
Effective Date: October 1, 2022
Supersedes: February 1, 2015

EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES (EMS) AIRCRAFT UTILIZATION

I.

PURPOSE

A.  To minimize morbidity and mortality, by ensuring the timely availability of air

medical resources for the City and County of San Francisco.

B.  To define the scope and manner with which the EMS System will use EMS aircraft for

emergency transport of critically ill and injured patients.

C.  To provide for coordinated air medical operations with ground responders and

hospital resources.

II.

POLICY

A.  Availability of Air Medical Services

1.  Primary response of EMS aircraft shall be made available to sick and injured

persons in the City and County of San Francisco whenever it is safe, appropriate,
and necessary to optimize the care of the patient.

2.  The pilot in command of the EMS aircraft shall have the full authority to abort or
decline response to any request for service when mechanical, geographic, or
flight conditions might endanger the crew or others.

3.  For incident scene operations where air response is requested, the closest

available, and most appropriate air ambulances shall be considered to be the air
response asset of choice.  Rescue aircraft may be used to supplant or extend the
availability of air medical transportation.

B.  Authorization of EMS Aircraft Service Providers

1.  All EMS aircraft operators routinely offering services to or from hospitals located
in the City and County of San Francisco shall have a written agreement with the
EMS Agency and be authorized to operate by the EMS Agency within the aircraft
operator’s jurisdiction of origin.

2.  A request from a designated dispatch center shall be deemed as authorization of
aircraft operated by the California Highway Patrol, Department of Forestry,
National Guard, or the Federal Government.

Policy Reference No.: 4020
Effective Date: October 1, 2022

3.  All EMS aircraft authorized to operate within the City and County of San

Francisco shall be classified.  Verification by the San Francisco EMS Agency of
classification of an EMS aircraft within the aircraft’s jurisdiction of origin shall
constitute classification of the EMS aircraft within the City and County of San
Francisco.  EMS aircraft classification shall be limited to the following categories:

a)  Air Ambulance
b)  ALS Rescue Aircraft
c)  BLS Rescue Aircraft
d)  Auxiliary Rescue Aircraft

4.  The San Francisco EMS Agency retains the right to inspect EMS Aircraft

Providers, including EMS aircraft, and training, quality improvement, and
operations policies, procedures, and records, to assure compliance with State
law and local policies and procedures.

5.  The San Francisco EMS Agency shall maintain an inventory of the number and
type of authorized EMS aircraft, the jurisdiction of origin of authorized EMS
aircraft, the patient capacity of authorized EMS aircraft, and the level of patient
care provided by EMS aircraft personnel and Receiving Hospitals with landing
sites approved by the State Department of Transportation, Aeronautics Division.

6.  Authorized EMS aircraft operators and service providers will comply with all EMS

Agency Policies, Procedures, and Protocols.

C.  Medical Flight Crew Requirements

1.  All members of the medical flight crew of an EMS aircraft shall be trained in

aeromedical transportation as specified in California Code of Regulations (CCR),
Title 22, Division 9, Chapter 8, Section 100302.

2.  Flight Paramedics shall complete a training program as listed in 22 CCR

100155(c), hold a current certification as a flight paramedic by the International
Board of Specialty Certification (IBSC), licensed in California, and accredited in
San Francisco if the aircraft is based within the City and County of San Francisco.

4.  All medical flight crew members shall participate in such continuing education

requirements as required by their licensure or certification.

D.  Ground Crew Requirements

1.  All providers operating in the vicinity of helicopters must be regularly trained in

standard helicopter safety operations.

Policy Reference No.: 4020
Effective Date: October 1, 2022

2.  The EMS Agency must review and approve helicopter safety training standards

used by field providers in San Francisco. See Policy 8000, Air Ambulance
Coordinator.

3.  EMS personnel shall follow all flight crew instructions such as securing patient

for loading and approaching/departing the aircraft.

E.  Patient Management

1.  Medical control for flight crew members shall be supplied by the air ambulance

operator’s Medical Director.

2.  EMS aircraft staffed by registered nurses will utilize the standardized procedures
of the Air Ambulance service provider.  If the air ambulance service provider is
based in San Francisco, these standardized procedures will be submitted for
review by the San Francisco EMS Agency Medical Director.

3.  In situations where the medical flight crew is less medically qualified than the

ground personnel from whom they receive patients, the medical flight crew may
assume patient care responsibility only as directed by the Base Hospital
Physician.

4.  EMS aircraft that do not have a medical flight crew shall not transport patients
except under direction of the Base Hospital Physician. Rescues involving short
haul, long-line, and/or hoist operations may be completed without a medical
crew for momentary movement of a patient.

5.  Upon request, prehospital care records will be submitted to the San Francisco
EMS Agency by the EMS Aircraft provider within 2 working days of each
operation.

F.  EMS Aircraft Space and Equipment

1.  All EMS aircraft shall be configured according to specifications in California Code

of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9, Chapter 8, Section 100306 (a-c).

G.  Representation of Provision of Air Ambulance Services

1.  No person or organization shall provide or hold themselves out as providing
prehospital Air Ambulance services unless that person or organization has

Policy Reference No.: 4020
Effective Date: October 1, 2022

aircraft which have been classified by the local EMS agency within the
jurisdiction of origin, with the exception of State or Federal aircraft.

H.  Authorized Landing Sites

1.  EMS Aircraft shall only land at landing sites meeting 1 of the following

criteria:

a.  Heliports permitted by the California Department of Transportation

(Caltrans).

b.  Pre-designated EMS landing sites. The Department of Emergency

Management shall maintain a list of pre-designated city-wide landing sites
under the Aviation Support Plan with specifications of latitude and longitude
(see Appendix B).

c.  Emergency helispots at or near the scene of a Multi-Casualty Incident (MCI),

disaster, or other critical incident. The Incident Commander (IC) shall
designate appropriate helispots at emergency scenes.

I.  Communication Policy

1.  EMS aircraft operators shall adhere to EMS Agency Policy #3010, EMS System

Communications Standards.

2.  EMS Aircraft shall maintain the capacity to communicate with the San Francisco
Department of Emergency Management: Division of Emergency Communications
(DEC), Landing Zone Operations, and the Base and Receiving Hospitals.

3.  The EMS Agency retains the right to inspect EMS aircraft communications
equipment of any Air Ambulance provider based in San Francisco to ensure
compliance with standards set forth in this policy (see Section I).

4.  Requests for access to the San Francisco P25 Radio System shall be directed to

the San Francisco Department of Emergency Management and facilitated by the
San Francisco Department of Technology (DT).

III.

Procedure

A.  Patient Clinical Conditions Warranting Air Medical Transport
EMS aircraft may be used in the following clinical situations:

1.  The patient's condition warrants rapid transport, and transport by land would be

hazardous or delayed because of road or traffic conditions (> 20 minutes);

Policy Reference No.: 4020
Effective Date: October 1, 2022

2.  The patient meets trauma center destination criteria, but Zuckerberg San

Francisco General Hospital (ZSFG) is unavailable and there is an extended (> 20
minutes) ground transport time interval to a regional designated trauma center;

3.  Air transport is recommended for patients who meet trauma center destination
criteria if the time from the initial incident to the patient’s expected arrival at the
trauma center via ground ambulance will exceed 30 minutes, AND the length of
ground transport would pose additional risk to morbidity or mortality;

4.  Critical trauma patient interfacility transfers from ZSFG to another Level I Adult
(Stanford Medical Center) or Pediatric Trauma Center (such as UCSF Benioff
Children’s Hospital – Oakland or Stanford Medical Center);

6.  Other conditions, such as prolonged extrication, as deemed warranted by the IC
and Medical Group Supervisor (MGS or IC designee). For questions regarding
applicability of other conditions, MGS may contact the Base Hospital Physician.

B.  Field Situations Warranting Air Medical Transport

The following field situations warrant the use of air medical transport:

1.  MCIs and/or incidents involving trauma when ZSFG trauma center capacity is
saturated, on Internal Disaster, and/or Trauma Center Bypass is activated;

2.  Inaccessibility to the scene by ground personnel or equipment;

3.  Air ambulance service may be initiated for MCIs involving one or more of the

following:

a.  Five or more patients meeting trauma center physiologic and/or anatomic
triage criteria (reference EMS Agency Policy #8000, EMS MCI Policy);
b.  Five or more patients with partial thickness burns greater than 10% total

body surface area or third-degree burns;

c.  A large number of casualties such that Receiving Hospitals in San Francisco
will be saturated and Mutual Aid from other Bay Area counties will be
requested by the IC

Policy Reference No.: 4020
Effective Date: October 1, 2022

C.  Initiating EMS Aircraft Response

1.  Field Emergency Response

a.  For field emergency responses, the decision to request an EMS aircraft is

based on the medical and scene management considerations in Section IV.A
and IV.B.

b.  During an MCI, the IC oversees all emergency operations on scene.

c.  The decision to request an EMS aircraft for a field emergency response shall

be made by the IC or his/her designee, upon:

1)  the advice of on-scene medical personnel such as the Medical Group

Supervisor or lead Paramedic; and/or,

2)  the suitability of the scene for helicopter operations; and/or

3)  IC and Medical Group Supervisor consultation with the Base Hospital

Physician/designee.

d.  All requests for an EMS aircraft field response shall be made through San
Francisco DEC’s Fire (SFFD) Dispatch (phone: 415-558-3291 or 415-558-
3268).  The following information must be provided to DEC by the IC or
his/her designee:
1)  Number of patients;
2)  Type and extent of injuries;
3)  Location of nearest landing site (use Appendix B, if possible);
4)  Nearest landmarks (e.g., highways, railroad tracks, water towers);
5)  Weather conditions as reported from the landing site (especially high

winds, fog or visibility problems);

6)  Radio frequency and call sign of the requesting agency/provider.

e.  The IC will determine the EMS landing site from the list of pre-designated
sites (see Appendix B) or an ad-hoc site based on scene management
considerations.

2.  Out-of-County Field Emergency Response

a.  For transfer of critical patients from scene calls originating outside of San

Francisco to a San Francisco Receiving Hospital:

1)  The EMS aircraft will contact DEC Fire Dispatch (415-558-3291 or

Policy Reference No.: 4020
Effective Date: October 1, 2022

415-558-3268) and identify the EMS landing site to be used.

2)  Personnel may use the UCSF Benioff Mission Bay (UCB) helipad following
established agreements and procedures by the Regents of the University
of California.

3.  Interfacility Transfers

a.  Interfacility transfers to and from UCB may utilize the UCB helipad following
established agreements and procedures by the Regents of the University of
California.

b.  For all other interfacility transfers of critical patients from San Francisco to an
out-of-county Receiving Hospital, the transferring facility will contact DEC
Fire Dispatch (415-558-3291 or 415-558-3268) and identify the EMS landing
site to be used for patient pickup in San Francisco.  Critical pediatric trauma
patient transfers from ZSFG Trauma Center to a regional Pediatric Trauma
Center may require use of Rolph Field EMS Landing site if ground transport is
extremely delayed.  EMS landing sites are reserved as “backup” for ground
transport in rare circumstances when ground transport is extremely delayed.
Without a ZSFG hospital helipad, secondary ground transport time intervals
to and from an EMS landing site make interfacility air transport a remote fall-
back option, if delayed ground transport or non-transfer clearly present a
threat to the life of the patient.

c.  Interfacility transfers from out-of-county to San Francisco (excluding UCB)

will use the San Francisco International Airport (SFO) or other out-of-county
heliports.  EMS landing sites are reserved for emergency landings only.

d.  Transferring/receiving air ambulance companies or hospitals with incoming

patients will arrange for interfacility ground transfers prior to departure from
point of origin.  San Francisco 911 ambulance service is not available for
interfacility transports from SFO or out-of-county heliports.

D.  Notification

1.  DEC Fire Dispatch will notify all responding agencies when an EMS aircraft has
been requested for response to an EMS landing site/helispot (SFFD, San
Francisco Police Department [SFPD], or other first responder agency).

2.  Cancellations shall only be made through the IC or designee.

Policy Reference No.: 4020
Effective Date: October 1, 2022

E.  Activation

1.  DEC Fire Dispatch will contact the closest, most appropriate air ambulance

company as noted in ReddiNet. These numbers are also listed in Appendix A of
this policy.

F.  Mobilization

1.  The closest, most appropriate EMS aircraft (on the primary provider list

approved by the EMS Agency) will respond within a 15-minute call to arrival time
interval.  If the 15-minute ETA is not possible for the initial air ambulance
company, the company will notify DEC Fire Dispatch (415-558-3291 or 415-558-
3268) or transferring facility, and another air ambulance company listed in
ReddiNet will be called. (These contact numbers are also listed in Appendix A of
this policy.)

G.  Deployment of Ground Crews

1.  A Battalion Chief and engine company of the SFFD will respond to the designated
EMS landing site/helispot for fire suppression support, and to clear the area of
people, animals, and any temporary obstructions.

2.  A SFFD Rescue Captain (RC) will respond as Landing Site Manager under direction
of the Battalion Chief. The RC - Landing Site Manager is responsible for aircraft
communications and oversight of ground to air patient transfer.

3.  Law enforcement should send officers to the designated EMS landing

site/helispot to secure the landing site perimeter for safety considerations. At
least one radio should be tuned to Calcord to provide emergency communication
to air resources if conditions become unsafe.

4.  Transferring/receiving air ambulance companies or hospitals with incoming

patients will arrange interfacility ground transfers from SFO or an out-of-county
heliport.

H.  Destination

1.  During an MCI or disaster, the EMS aircraft crew will determine the destination

for patients requiring air medical evacuation. The EMS aircraft and/or its
dispatch center will contact DEC Fire Dispatch with the Receiving Hospital
information.  Enroute the EMS aircraft will relay pertinent patient information to
the Receiving Hospital.

Policy Reference No.: 4020
Effective Date: October 1, 2022

2.  Determination for destination will be based on the shortest ETA to a facility best

suited for definitive care of the patient.

3.  The EMS aircraft pilot will have the final decision as to destination based on

weather and flight safety considerations.

I.  Communication Procedure

1.  General

a.  For field emergency air response, DEC Fire Dispatch will contact the closest,
most appropriate air ambulance company dispatch listed in ReddiNet. These
contact numbers are also listed in Appendix A of this policy.

2.  Frequency Assignments

a.  DEC to/from EMS Aircraft

1)  The EMS aircraft responding to field emergencies will contact DEC Fire
Dispatch on landline (415-558-3291 or 415-558-3268) while enroute to
the scene to confirm radio frequency and ground contact/incident
identifier.

2)  Once confirmed, EMS Aircraft with access to San Francisco’s public safety
talk groups may communicate directly with DEC over those talk groups.

3)  Backup frequency on the 800 MHz system is CAFIRE2 (806.91250

Transmit CTCSS 156.7 and 851.9125 Receive CTCSS 156.7)

4)  An additional backup channel for initial contact is VFIRE21 (154.2800

CTCSS 156.7 Transmit AND 154.2800 CTCSS 156.7 Receive)

5)  US Coast Guard helicopters will utilize Marine VHF 22A.

b.  Landing Zone Operations to/from EMS Aircraft

1)  EMS Aircraft with access to San Francisco’s public safety talk groups may
communicate directly with Incident Command over those talk groups.

2)  EMS Aircraft with no access to San Francisco talk groups shall utilize

CALCORD (156.075 transmit; 156.075 receive  (TX/RX TONE 6 [156.7]) for
non-repeated air to ground communication. Exception: US Coast Guard
helicopters will utilize Marine VHF 22A.

3)  Backup frequency on the 800 MHz system is CAFIRE2 (806.91250

Transmit CTCSS 156.7 and 851.9125 Receive CTCSS 156.7)

4)  An additional backup channel for initial contact is VFIRE21 (154.2800

CTCSS 156.7 Transmit AND 154.2800 CTCSS 156.7 Receive)

Policy Reference No.: 4020
Effective Date: October 1, 2022

5)  The ground crew will be referred to as

LZ (call name

determined by specific location of landing site).

6)  Aircraft should monitor AIR GUARD on a separate receiver for emergency
communications of hazards or LZ conditions. (TX/RX 168.625 MHz, TX
Tone 110.9)

c.  Base Hospital and  Receiving Hospitals to/from EMS Aircraft

1)  EMS Aircraft with access to San Francisco Hospital talk groups may utilize

them to “ring down” the receiving facility

2)  The dispatch center for the EMS Aircraft may also relay ringdown reports

on the crew’s behalf

3)  VMED28 (formerly known as HEARNet, 155.34 [PL-156.7]) may also be

utilized for limited communications between hospitals and air
ambulances with advance coordination. Hospitals do not routinely
monitor this talk group.

4)  If other channels are unsuccessful, a backup channel for EMS Aircraft to

Base Hospital (ZSFG) is UHF Med-9, 462.95 (PL-167.9) 467.9500 transmit /
467.9500 receive (CTCSS – 167.9).

d.  Air to Air

1)  The air-to-air communications should be coordinated on the designated

air traffic control (ATC) channel assigned by ATC at SFO.

2)  Aircraft should monitor AIR GUARD on a separate receiver for emergency
communications of air-to-air hazards from other response aircraft. (TX/RX
168.625 MHz, TX Tone 110.9)

J.  Quality Assurance

1.  Activation of this policy requires an Exception Report and will be reviewed by the

EMS Agency’s QI Committee.

IV.

AUTHORITY
A.  California Public Utilities Code, Sections 21662.1 – 21662.5,
B.  California Code of Regulations, Title 21, Division 2.5, Sections 3527 and 3533
C.  California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9, Chapter 8, Sections 100276 –

100306

D.  California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9, Chapter 4, Section 100144

Appendix A: AIR AMBULANCE PROVIDERS CONTACT INFORMATION

Air Ambulance Dispatch phone numbers are listed below and in ReddiNet.

Policy Reference No.: 4020
Effective Date: October 1, 2022

AIR AMBULANCE PROVIDERS:

REACH

1.  Concord (REACH 32 & REACH 100)
2.  Napa (REACH 3)
3.  Santa Rosa (REACH 1)
4.  Gilroy (REACH 33/CALSTAR 2)
5.  Salinas (REACH 36/CALSTAR 5)
6.  Modesto (REACH 41/CALSTAR 12)
7.  Merced (REACH 42/CALSTAR 13)
Dispatch number: 800-338-4045

LIFE FLIGHT OF STANFORD HEALTHCARE

Stanford Health Care, Palo Alto
Dispatch number: 800-321-7828

Air Ambulances

COMPANY

DISPATCH
PHONE

BAY AREA AIR AMBULANCE and AIR RESCUE PROVIDERS

CLASS

STAFF

RESCUE CAPABILITIES

REACH
(based in
Concord, Santa
Rosa, Napa)
Stanford
Lifeflight
(based at
Stanford
Hospital)

1-800-338-
4045

Air
Ambulance

Flight Nurse (CFRN)
Flight Paramedic (FP-C)

None

1-800-321-
7828

Air
Ambulance

2 Flight Nurses (CFRN)

None

Policy Reference No.: 4020
Effective Date: October 1, 2022

HOURS OF
OPERATION

Access to SF
CERS 2 P25
Trunking
Talkgroup?

24/7

24/7

No

No

Air Rescue Units

COMPANY

DISPATCH
PHONE

CLASS

STAFF

RESCUE CAPABILITIES

HOURS OF
OPERATION

Access to SF
CERS 2 P25
Trunking
Talkgroup?

CHP
(ALS and BLS
units based in
Napa)

(Confidential allied
agency line
published at DEC)

ALS Rescue
(Napa); BLS
Rescue
(Napa)

EMT-P (ALS)
EMT (BLS)

Hoists baskets, people—
cable that runs down and
back up to helicopter,
vertical line up to 150 ft.;
can carry 1 patient only; can
do cliff/boat/water rescue
(have to pick up a rescue
swimmer in San Francisco to
do water rescue). Hover and
1-skid operations

Medical missions:
10am – 4am, 7 days
per week.

Non-medical missions:
24/7

Yes

Air Rescue Units (cont’d.)

COMPANY

DISPATCH
PHONE

CLASS

STAFF

RESCUE CAPABILITIES

Policy Reference No.: 4020
Effective Date: October 1, 2022

HOURS OF
OPERATION

Access to SF
CERS 2 P25
Trunking
Talkgroup?

(published at DEC)
Water rescue
missions OK to
request
directly; All
other requests
must go
through state
mutual aid

510-881-1833

Rescue (mission specific; can
get EMT rescue swimmer,
otherwise crew is not
medical capable)

ALS/BLS Rescue (Do not
always have a paramedic—
volunteer flight paramedic
program; can take ground
paramedic from scene)

EMT rescue
swimmer (must
be requested at
time of
dispatch—
mission specific)

EMT-1 or EMT-P

Hoist baskets, people;
designed to pull people off
water or off boats; HH-65
Dolphin aircraft

24/7

No (use
Marine VHF
22A)

Do search; do not do short
haul (with a line attached
to the helicopter); no hoist;
can land, get out and try to
help.  Can transport 1
patient at a time.

Day only; on-call
at night but need
some ambient
light for
operations

No

707-565-2121

ALS Rescue

EMT and
Paramedic (ALS)

Vertical long-line—up to
200 ft.

10 hours per day;
nocs on-call

No

(published at
Dispatch)
Request must
go through
state mutual
aid

Auxiliary Rescue

No medical staff

Do not search, but will
rescue; can transport
rescue teams on Hueys,
Blackhawk, Pavehawk
(goes 1000 miles; carries
more than 20,000 lbs.)

24/7

No

Coast Guard
Air Station
(based at
SFO)

EAST BAY
REGIONAL
PARK FIRE

SONOMA
COUNTY
SHERIFF’S
DEPT
California AIR
NATIONAL
GUARD
(stationed at
Moffett
Field)

Appendix B: Landing Zones

1/6

Type of
Authorized
Aircraft

LZ Dimensions  &
Weight Bearing
Capacity

Notes on LZ terrain (identified hazards,
terrain, and/or obstacles to be
concerned with)

USCG:
MH65

Elevation: 35'
Length: 425'  Width:
350'

2 fields to be used. 150' light poles
along the E and W side. Tall windmill
on S side. Ground covering is astro turf.

Longitude (x)

Latitude (y)

-122.5088845

37.76697395

USCG:
MH65

USCG:
MH65

USCG:
MH65

USCG:
MH65

USMC:
MV22,
UH1Y,
USCG:
MH65

USMC:
UH1Y,
USCG:
MH65

Elevation: 295'
Length: 360'  Width:
160'

Elevation: 100'
Length: 250'  Width:
170'

Elevation: 350'
Length: 725'  Width:
325'

Elevation: 110'
Length: 350'  Width:
160'

Elevation: 100'
Length: 360'  Width:
170'

Elevation: 100'
Length: 260'  Width:
80'

USCG:
MH65

Elevation: 100'
Length: 200'  Width:
200'

Goal Posts on both ends, elevated
terrain and buildings on W and NW
side. Main building on W side has a 30'
antenna. Score board on SE side is 30'.

100' light poles on N and S side. 200'
trees on S and E side.

250' light poles on all sides. 300' trees
on NE corner. 300' trees along S edge.
Wires on all streets. Ground covering
astro turf.
250' light poles on all sides. 300' trees
on NE corner. 300' trees along S edge.
Wires on all streets. Ground covering
astro turf.

-122.4486615

37.72575329

-122.3851757  37.73922847

-122.4577852

37.71553339

-122.4093041

37.76507777

300' building on N side. 75' building on
S side.

-122.4241667

37.80466667

200' on W side. 150' tree on E side.
500' building on S side.

-122.3958333

37.79583333

200' trees on W side.

-122.4098651

37.80083871

FID

LZ_ID

LZ Site Name

LZ Site Address

1

RPD1

BEACH CHALET
SOCCER FIELD

JFK
DRIVE@GREAT
HWY OR 47TH
AVE

2

RPD10

CITY COLLEGE

50 PHELAN

3

RPD2

4

RPD3

YOUNGBLOOD-
COLEMAN
PLAYGROUND

MINNIE & LOVIE
WARD REC
CENTER

1398 HUDSON

650 CAPITOL AVE

5

RPD4

FRANKLIN
SQUARE

16th ST &
BRYANT

6

SF01

8

SF03

GALILEO HIGH
SCHOOL/
FOOTBALL FIELD

JUSTIN HERMAN
PLAZA/ SUE
BIERMAN PARK
(AKA Ferry Park /
Embarcadero
Plaza)

9

SF04

WASHINGTON
SQUARE

1150 FRANCISCO
ST

WASHINGTON/
DRUMM/
MISSION/ EMB

600 COLUMBUS
AVE FILBERT/
STOCKTON/
COLUMBUS/
UNION

Effective December 2022

Appendix B: Landing Zones

2/6

LZ Dimensions  &
Weight Bearing
Capacity

Notes on LZ terrain (identified hazards,
terrain, and/or obstacles to be
concerned with)

Longitude (x)

Latitude (y)

Elevation: 100'
Length: 375'  Width:
200'

Elevation: 30'
Length: 450'  Width:
450'

Elevation: 10'
Length: 380'  Width:
230'

Elevation: 30'
Length: 200'  Width:
200'

Elevation: 160'
Length: 400'  Width:
400'

Elevation: 150'
Length: 425'  Width:
425'

100' light poles surrounding field.

-122.42545

37.78161667

100' light poles on S and N side.  60-
100' buildings on all sides across street.

-122.3987667

37.76505

50' light poles surrounding area, single
thin wire running between light poles.

-122.3861788  37.78688888

-122.3716392

37.82383355

100' trees on N and W side.

-122.4027627  37.78502925

300' building on E side.

-122.4350152

37.78307616

150' light towes on all sides.

-122.4330643

37.80199785

FID

LZ_ID

LZ Site Name

LZ Site Address

10

SF05

JAMES P LANG
FIELD/
PLAYGROUND

901 TURK/
GOUGH/
OCTAVIA/
GOLDEN GATE

11

SF06

JACKSON
PLAYGROUND

1645 17TH ST/
ARKANSAS

12

SF07  PIER 30-32

EMBARCADERO/
BRYANT/ BEALE

13

SF08

TREASURE ISLAND
/ JOB CORPS
ATHLETIC FIELD

9TH ST/D
AVENUE

14

SF09

YERBA BUENA
GARDENS

MISSION/3RD/4T
H STS.

15

SF10

KIMBALL
[RAYMOND]
PLAYGROUND

STEINER/
OFFARRELL/
PIERCE

17

SF12

MOSCONE REC
CENTER
(PLAYGROUND)

1800 CHESTNUT
WEBSTER
@BUCHANAN

Type of
Authorized
Aircraft
USMC:
CH53,
MV22,
UH1Y,
USCG:
MH65
USMC:
CH53,
MV22,
UH1Y,
USCG:
MH65

USCG:
MH65

USMC:
UH1Y,
USCG:
MH65

USCG:
MH65

USMC:
CH53,
MV22,
UH1Y,
USCG:
MH65
USMC:
CH53,
MV22,
UH1Y,
USCG:
MH65

Effective December 2022

Appendix B: Landing Zones

3/6

LZ Dimensions  &
Weight Bearing
Capacity

Notes on LZ terrain (identified hazards,
terrain, and/or obstacles to be
concerned with)

Longitude (x)

Latitude (y)

Elevation: 250'
Length: 850'  Width:
550'

200' trees surrounding LZ.  NO WIRES.

-122.464436

37.76730245

Elevation: 290'
Length: 360'  Width:
225'

LZ sits in a depression with rising
terrain and high rise building to the S.
250' light poles surrouding LZ. 200' tree
on W side. Best ingress to E.

-122.4559345

37.76677151

Elevation: 175'
Length: 1500'
Width: 485'

Elevation: 100'
Length: 250'  Width:
170'

Elevation: 100'
Length: 250'  Width:
170'

Elevation: 100'
Length: 250'  Width:
170'

200' trees on all sides. No wires.

-122.492612

37.76823069

-122.4574293

37.77864791

-122.4984392

37.73702923

-122.4981071

37.74994202

FID

LZ_ID

LZ Site Name

LZ Site Address

18

SF13

GOLDEN  GATE
PARK/ BIG REC
BALL FIELD

ML KING
@7TH&9TH AVE

19

SF14

GOLDEN GATE
PARK/ KEZAR
PAVILION

755 STANYAN

20

SF15

GOLDEN GATE
PARK/ POLO FIELD

MIDDLE
DR/31&36AVE

21

SF16

ROSSI
PLAYGROUND
(ANGELO J.)

2 N WILLARD/
ARGUELLO /
ANZA/ EDWARD

23

SF18

SOUTH SUNSET
PLAYGROUND

2601 40TH AVE/
VICIENTE/
WAWONA

24

SF19

ORTEGA BRANCH
LIBRARY (AKA
West Sunset #3)

3223
ORTEGA/39TH
AVE

Type of
Authorized
Aircraft
USMC:
CH53,
MV22,
UH1Y,
USCG:
MH65

USMC:
UH1Y,
USCG:
MH65

USMC:
CH53,
MV22,
UH1Y,
USCG:
MH65
USMC:
CH53,
MV22,
UH1Y,
USCG:
MH65
USMC:
CH53,
MV22,
UH1Y,
USCG:
MH65
USMC:
MV22,
UH1Y,
USCG:
MH65

Effective December 2022

Appendix B: Landing Zones

4/6

LZ Dimensions  &
Weight Bearing
Capacity

Notes on LZ terrain (identified hazards,
terrain, and/or obstacles to be
concerned with)

Longitude (x)

Latitude (y)

Elevation: 100'
Length: 250'  Width:
170'

Elevation: 100'
Length: 250'  Width:
170'

Elevation: 100'
Length: 250'  Width:
170'

Elevation: 100'
Length: 250'  Width:
170'

Elevation: 100'
Length: 250'  Width:
170'

Elevation: 100'
Length: 250'  Width:
170'

-122.4978713

37.74857172

-122.4453631

37.7239713

Location is prone to wind gusts that are
sporadic and not consistent.

-122.431427

37.71351144

-122.4060333

37.74965

-122.461565

37.80379705

-122.458243

37.80070223

FID

LZ_ID

LZ Site Name

LZ Site Address

25

SF20

WEST SUNSET
PLAYGROUND #2

41ST
AVE/PACHECO

26

SF21

BALBOA PARK &
PLAYGROUND

OCEAN/SAN JOSE

44

SF22

CROCKER
AMAZON
PLAYGROUND

GENEVA/MOSCO
W/ITALY/FRANCE

28

SF25

ROLPH PARK

1499
HAMPSHIRE ST/
26th St.

29

SF26

PRESIDIO/ CRISSY
FIELD

30

SF27

PRESIDIO/ MAIN
PARADE GROUND
PARKING LOT

MONTGOMERY/
LINCOLN/ ANZA/
SHERIDAN

Type of
Authorized
Aircraft
USMC:
CH53,
MV22,
UH1Y,
USCG:
MH65
USMC:
CH53,
MV22,
UH1Y,
USCG:
MH65
USMC:
CH53,
MV22,
UH1Y,
USCG:
MH65
USMC:
UH1Y,
USCG:
MH65
USMC:
CH53,
MV22,
UH1Y,
USCG:
MH65
USMC:
CH53,
MV22,
UH1Y,
USCG:
MH65

Effective December 2022

Appendix B: Landing Zones

5/6

LZ Dimensions  &
Weight Bearing
Capacity

Notes on LZ terrain (identified hazards,
terrain, and/or obstacles to be
concerned with)

Longitude (x)

Latitude (y)

Elevation: 100'
Length: 250'  Width:
170'

Elevation: 100'
Length: 250'  Width:
170'

Elevation: 100'
Length: 250'  Width:
170'

Elevation: 100'
Length: 250'  Width:
170'

Elevation: 100'
Length: 250'  Width:
170'

Elevation: 170'
Length: 360'  Width:
160'
Long Axis: 020/200
Elevation: 200'
Length: 350'  Width:
150'
Long Axis: 150/320
Elevation: 150'
Length: 260'  Width:
115'
Long Axis: 150/300

-122.4746047

37.80304276

-122.4832275

37.79273996

-122.5067552

37.78352032

-122.3900712  37.76663703

-122.4932391

37.7287976

Wires on SW. Tall buildings on NE side.

-122.4419642

37.72055279

Building on W side. Goal posts on both
ends.

-122.4057744

37.72192269

No wires, no real obstacles.

-122.4014511

37.73660267

FID

LZ_ID

LZ Site Name

LZ Site Address

31

SF28

PRESIDIO/ FORT
SCOTT
[WINFIELD]

RALSTON AVE/
STOREY

32

SF29

PRESIDIO/  BAKER
BEACH/ PARKING
LOT

BATTERY
CHAMBERLIN/
BOWLEY

33

SF30

VA MEDICAL
CENTER HELIPAD

4150 CLEMENT
ST/ 42nd AVE

34

SF31

UCSF MISSION
BAY HELIPAD

1825 FOURTH ST
@ 16th ST

35

SF32

LAKE MERCED/
PARKING  LOT/
NORTH

LAKE
MERCED/SUNSET

36

USD1

BALBOA HIGH
SCHOOL

1000 CAYUGA

37

USD2

38

USD4

PHILIP & SALA
BURTON HIGH
SCHOOL

THURGOOD
MARSHALL HIGH
SCHOOL

400 MANSELL

45 CONKLING

Type of
Authorized
Aircraft
USMC:
CH53,
MV22,
UH1Y,
USCG:
MH65
USMC:
UH1Y,
USCG:
MH65
USMC:
UH1Y,
USCG:
MH65

USCG:
MH65

USMC:
CH53,
MV22,
UH1Y,
USCG:
MH65

USCG:
MH65

USCG:
MH65

USCG:
MH65

Effective December 2022

Appendix B: Landing Zones

6/6

FID

LZ_ID

LZ Site Name

LZ Site Address

Type of
Authorized
Aircraft

LZ Dimensions  &
Weight Bearing
Capacity

Notes on LZ terrain (identified hazards,
terrain, and/or obstacles to be
concerned with)

Longitude (x)

Latitude (y)

39

USD6

RUTH ASAWA
SCHOOL OF THE
ARTS

555 PORTOLA DR

USCG:
MH65

40

USD7

WASHINGTON
HIGH  SCHOOL
[GEORGE]

600 32ND AVE

USCG:
MH65

41

USD8

LINCOLN HIGH
SCHOOL

2162 24TH AVE

USCG:
MH65

42

USD9

LOWELL HIGH
SCHOOL

1101
EUCALYPTUS

USCG:
MH65

Elevation: 540'
Length: 350'  Width:
150'

Long Axis: 140/320

Elevation: 250'
Length: 360'  Width:
160'
Long Axis: 070/250

Elevation: 395'
Length: 355'  Width:
200'

Long Axis: 160/340

Elevation: 100'
Length: 550'  Width:
360'

Long Axis: 055/235

Goal posts on either side of field.
Scoreboard on SE side.  LZ is at the top
of a rising valley surrounded by 500'
trees and rising terrain to the N and W
with school buildings.  Recommended
ingress from valley to the NW.

-122.4479029

37.744048

200' building on N side of field. 50'
Wires along S and W side of LZ.

-122.4909603

37.77670011

200' tree on SE corner.  Goal post and
flagpole on SE side.  Elevated terrain
and multi-story building on NW side.
No wires.

-122.4798878

37.74567333

Rising terrain and 300' trees on NE
side. Building and elevated terrain on N
side. No wires. Football field to S is a
viable alternate landing location.

-122.4823362

37.72930269

43

USDT5

MISSION HIGH
SCHOOL

3750 18TH ST

Elevation: 100'
Length: 315'  Width:
225'

USCG:
MH65

50' building on SE side. 150' flagpole to
SE. 35' building on NW side.

-122.4276225

37.7622912

Long Axis: 070/250

Effective December 2022

Policy Reference No.: 4020
Effective Date: October 1, 2022

Appendix C: REGIONAL TRAUMA CENTERS
Contact Information and Flight Time Intervals

TRAUMA CENTER

Zuckerberg San Francisco General
(air transport to/from Rolph Field
EMS Landing site)

UCSF Benioff Children’s Hospital
Oakland (Level II pediatric)
Eden Hospital (Level II)
(Castro Valley)
John Muir Hospital (Level II) (Walnut
Creek)
Stanford Medical Center (Level I
adult & Level I pediatric)
Regional Medical Center (Level II
adult)
Santa Clara Valley Medical Center
(San Jose) (Level I)
Providence Santa Rosa Memorial
(Level II)
UC Davis (Level I adult & pediatric)

FLIGHT TIME INTERVAL
from central San Francisco
ED CHARGE NURSE: 628-206-8111  3 minute air time (to Rolph

PHONE CONTACT

Field @ C Chavez and
Potrero [addt’l 3 minute
ground transport interval]

ED: 510-428-3240

ED: 510-889-5015

ED: 925-939-5800

ED: 650-497-5803

ED: 408-729-2841

ED: 408-885-6912
ED: 707-525-5207

ED: 916-734-3790

5 min.

10 min.

10 min.

12 min.

20 min.

20 min.
25 min.

35 min.

