SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY

MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

PATIENT CONSENT FOR AND PATIENT REFUSAL OF EMERGENCY MEDICAL CARE AND
TRANSPORTATION

EFFECTIVE DATE: 4/1/25

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 4040

SUPERSEDES: 10/1/24

1.  PURPOSE

1.1.  To define who a patient is
1.2.  To specify the requirements for evaluation and documentation of non-transported patients at

the scene of a prehospital medical incident.

1.3.  To establish performance and documentation standards for non-transport incidents, including
the assessment and release of patients who choose to decline transport or refuse services
against medical advice.

1.4.  To establish a process for when prehospital personnel cannot physically access a patient.

2.  DEFINITIONS

2.1.  Adult:  Adult is a:

2.1.1.  Individual eighteen (18) years of age or greater
2.1.2.  Legally emancipated minor*
2.1.3.  Legally married minor*
2.1.4.  Individual on-duty with the armed forces;
2.1.5.  Self-sufficient minor at least 15 years of age, living apart from parents, and managing

their own financial affairs.

2.1.6.  *SFPD may be notified if the Prehospital Provider cannot verify if patient is an adult.
2.2.  Capacity: Capacity is the ability to comprehend, and demonstrate an understanding of, the
nature and consequences of refusing medical care. An individual has capacity if they:
2.2.1.  Are able to rationally and logically discuss/repeat details of medical need, including

benefits, risks, and alternatives and the consequences of refusal; and

2.2.2.  Have not been declared to lack capacity to make decisions (as described in Section 2.3)
2.3.  Designated Medical Decision Maker or Authorized Legal Representative: An individual, other

than the patient, who has the legal and documented responsibility for making the patient’s
medical decisions. This individual may be:
2.3.1.  A parent or guardian of a minor;
2.3.2.  A conservator who presents letters of conservatorship from a court stating that the

patient is not competent to give or withhold consent for medical care.
2.3.2.1.  Letters of conservatorship are specific regarding the patient’s lack of capacity

to give or withhold consent to psychiatric treatment, routine medical care,
and necessary/non-routine medical treatment. The letter shall match the
conservatee’s name, be checked for correct timeframe and signed/dated.  An

1

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 4040

EFFECTIVE DATE: 4/1/25

LPS conservator is unlikely to have authority to make non-routine medical
treatment decisions, and a court order must be sought for non-routine
treatment. Emergent/life-saving treatment may always be provided without
consent from the decision-maker. An LPS conservatee cannot refuse
transport to a Receiving Facility without the approval of the conservator
(Welfare and Institutions Code § 5358.5). Patients may appear to have
decision-making capacity but have been legally declared incompetent.
Prehospital personnel should contact the conservator when encountering
patients known to be conserved. If the court order is silent on a relevant
issue, and/or prehospital personnel cannot get a hold of the conservator,
contact the Base Hospital.

2.3.3.  An attorney -in-fact appointed under a durable power of attorney for health care;
2.3.4.  In the absence of any of the above in no. 1-3, the patient’s surrogate decision-maker

with Base Hospital consultation.

2.4.  Gravely disabled: A condition in which a patient, as a result of a mental health disorder,

impairment by chronic alcoholism, severe substance use disorder, or a co-occurring mental
health disorder and severe substance use disorder is unable to provide for their basic needs
for food, clothing, shelter, personal safety, or necessary medical care.

2.5.  Patient: A patient is any individual identified by a prehospital provider who meets any of the

following descriptions:
2.5.1.  Has requested medical assistance;
2.5.2.  For whom medical assistance has been requested by another person and:
2.5.2.1.  Has a complaint suggestive of potential illness or injury, or
2.5.2.2.  Has obvious evidence of illness or injury, or
2.5.2.3.  Has experienced an acute event that could reasonably lead to illness or

injury, or

2.5.2.4.  Is in a circumstance or situation that could reasonably lead to illness or injury,

or

2.5.2.5.  Is experiencing an apparent medical emergency.

2.6.  Psychiatric/5150 Involuntary Hold: A patient who is involuntarily detained and transported for
evaluation under the authority of Welfare and Institutions Code (e.g. § 5150, § 5585 [minors])
because as a result of a mental health disorder, the patient is a danger to themselves, danger
to others, and/or gravely disabled. A law enforcement officer or a provider authorized by the
DPH Director of Behavioral Health may detain an individual and place them, using an
authorized written application, on an involuntary hold for up to 72 hours for assessment,
evaluation, and crisis intervention or placement for evaluation and treatment. The authorized
written application must accompany the patient to the facility that they are transported to for
further assessment.

2.7.  Routine Medical Treatment: Includes, but is not limited to, diagnostic tests, physical exams,

and for non-life-threatening wound care.

2

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 4040

EFFECTIVE DATE: 4/1/25

3.  POLICY

3.1.  Offer of Transport

3.1.1.  Prehospital personnel must offer to provide care and transport to a patient unless:

3.1.1.1.  Otherwise provided in EMSA Policy # 4050 (Death in the Field)
3.1.1.2.  Otherwise provided in EMSA Policy # 4051 (Do Not Resuscitate)
3.1.1.3.  There is a declared state of emergency or disaster, as defined in EMSA Policy

# 8000 (Multi-Casualty Incident)
3.1.1.4.  Prehospital personnel safety is threatened

3.2.  Documentation

3.2.1.  Non-transporting prehospital personnel, handing off care to transporting prehospital

personnel, must document assessment findings and interventions using an EMS
Agency approved form.  Non-transporting prehospital personnel shall use dark blue or
black ink on written forms to complete the transfer of care report, clearly and legibly,
and sign it upon completion.
3.2.1.1.  A copy of this report must be turned into the receiving hospital along with

the transport Patient Care Report (PCR).

3.2.1.2.  Provider Agencies shall retain the original copy of the Transfer of Care

documentation in compliance with medical record regulations.

3.2.2.  Transporting prehospital personnel shall complete a (PCR) for each patient contact.
3.2.3.  All non-transported patient encounters must be documented on a PCR (electronic or

paper) to the best effort of the responder and include the following information:
3.2.3.1.  Complete assessment findings;
3.2.3.2.  Medical care and transportation offers;
3.2.3.3.  Any care given;
3.2.3.4.  Explanation to the patient including potential consequences of the patient's

actions;

3.2.3.5.  The potential benefits of prehospital care and transportation;
3.2.3.6.  The patient's own words verbalizing an understanding of the event, the
refusal of care, and the potential consequences of the refusal of care;

3.2.3.7.  The patient's capacity and criteria of self-determination to make the medical

care decision (include name, age, and guardian as appropriate);
3.2.3.8.  An assessment of the patient's mental status, including orientation and

speech, gait and if able, other physiologic parameters including vital signs;

3.2.3.9.  The name and relationship of a parent or guardian to the patient, if the

patient is released to that person;

3.2.3.10. The name and badge number of the police officer if the patient is released to

the officer;

3.2.3.11. Patient signature acknowledging the availability of ambulance transport and

their refusal of services;

3.2.3.12. Witness signature if available (witness is third party who is not the patient or

provider);

3

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 4040

EFFECTIVE DATE: 4/1/25

3.2.3.13. If a patient refuses to sign the form (or electronic equivalent) after having

been determined to have decision making capacity, the release shall be
documented within, or included with, the PCR after being signed by both
members of the EMS crew and a witness (if available).

3.2.3.14. The documentation shall include a description of the circumstances surround
3.2.3.15. ding the refusal to sign including direct quotes of statements made by the

patient;

3.2.3.16. Patients declining transport (PDT) with MINOR medical conditions require, at

minimum, the signatures of one paramedic + one crew member (EMT or
above). Refer to Section 4.1;

3.2.3.17. Patients refusing transport against medical advice (AMA) with potentially
significant or life threatening medical conditions (as defined in Section 4.2)
require, at minimum, one of the following:
•  The signatures of one paramedic + one crew member (EMT or above)
May consider Base Hospital physician consultation if prehospital
personnel feel there is a need, benefit for the patient, or unique/unusual
circumstance.
If the patient is detained by or in custody of law enforcement, and
refusing evaluation, treatment, or transport, Base Hospital contact is
required.

•

3.2.3.18. For incidents where the above items 3.2.3.1 through 3.2.3.17, cannot be

performed or completed, refer to Prehospital Personnel Resources for Patient
Management.

3.2.4.  During a declared MCI, documentation shall be in accordance with Policy # 8000.
3.2.5.  PDT and AMA at special events / mass gatherings approved under EMSA Policy # 7010

(EMS at Special Events) shall follow the guidelines defined in Policy 7010.
3.2.6.  Prehospital personnel and Provider Agencies shall maintain confidentiality of the

verbal and documented patient and medical information in compliance with applicable
state and federal law on patient confidentiality.

3.3.  Patient Evaluation

3.3.1.  Minimum evaluation for ALL patients is described in EMS Agency Treatment Protocols

1.01 (Primary Survey) and 1.02 (Secondary Survey).

3.4.  Patient Decision-Making Capacity and Self-Determination for Treatment Purposes

3.4.1.  The law presumes an individual has capacity to consent or refuse care. Pre-hospital
personnel alleging a lack of capacity must thoroughly document the reasons why the
patient lacks capacity. The presence of a psychiatric illness, drug and/or alcohol use, or
physical/mental impairment may impair patient decision-making capacity but are not
sufficient on their own to eliminate decision-making capacity. Any patient who meets
the self-determination criteria below shall be allowed to make decisions regarding their

4

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 4040

EFFECTIVE DATE: 4/1/25

medical care, including the refusal of evaluation, treatment and/or transport. The
criteria for allowing self-determination of medical care include:
3.4.1.1.  Having capacity (as defined in Section 2.2); and
•  Being an adult (as defined in Section 2.3); or
•  Pregnant minors if related to self-determination for the medical

treatment of their pregnancy or reproductive health.

3.4.2.  Any patient who presents with one or more of the following conditions shall be
considered as lacking decision-making capacity, in the opinion of the prehospital
provider, regarding refusal of medical care. When safe to do so, the individual shall be
transported to the appropriate Receiving Facility for further evaluation. (Patient
consent in these circumstances is implied, meaning that a reasonable and competent
adult would allow the appropriate medical treatment under similar circumstances):
3.4.2.1.  Altered mental status. Causes of altered mental status may include, but not

Influence of drugs and/or alcohol

limited to:
•  Abnormal vital signs
•
•  Psychiatric illness
•  Metabolic or infectious causes (e.g. CNS infection or hypoglycemia)
•  Dementia
•  Head trauma

3.4.2.2.  Minors (as defined above) with no parent or legal guardian available;
3.4.2.3.  Legally incompetent adult without legal guardian or DPOA available;
3.4.2.4.  Patients who are conserved (under a probate or LPS, temporary, or

permanent conservatorship) may have capacity to make certain health care
decisions.
•  The prehospital provider must review the Letters of Conservatorship to

determine whether the person lacks capacity to make decisions regarding
psychiatric treatment, routine medical treatment, or necessary/non-
routine treatment. Emergent/life-saving treatment may always be
provided without consent from the conservator. Non-emergent treatment
may qualify as routine or non-routine medical treatment, depending on
the treatment. See Section II for definitions.

•  An LPS conservatee cannot refuse transport to a Receiving Facility

without the approval of the conservator (Welfare and Institutions Code §
5358.5).

3.4.2.5.  If special circumstances or uncertainty exists as to the presence of one of the

above conditions and patient decision-making capacity is thought to be
intact, the base hospital may be contacted for consultation and
recommendations.

3.5.  5150 Involuntary Holds

5

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 4040

EFFECTIVE DATE: 4/1/25

3.5.1.  Patients who as a result of a mental disorder have been determined to be a danger to
themselves, danger to others, or are gravely disabled, and are refusing voluntary
transport must be placed on a 5150 involuntary hold in order to transport them to a
Receiving Facility for further assessment and treatment or placement for evaluation
and treatment. Any person who wants to be transported who has expressed danger to
self, danger to others, or are gravely disabled but has not received an assessment for
5150 hold criteria, may be transported without a 5150 hold.

3.5.2.  Patients who are detained under a 5150 involuntary hold by law enforcement or an
authorized prehospital provider can refuse non-emergent medical treatment.

3.5.3.  Pre-hospital providers have authority to transport patients to a Receiving Facility

detained on a 5150 involuntary hold for assessment, evaluation, and crisis intervention
or placement for evaluation and treatment to an authorized facility, even if the patient
refuses treatment or refuses transport.

3.5.4.  Patients who are on an LPS Conservatorship (temporary or permanent pursuant to

Welfare and Institutions Code § 5350 or § 5352.1) are on an involuntary hold and can
be transported to a Receiving Facility, even if the patient refuses treatment or refuses
transport. Contact the Conservator in these situations.

4.  PATIENT RELEASE AND NON-TRANSPORT PROCESS

4.1.  Patient Refusals with Minor Medical Conditions – Patient Declines Transport (PDT)

4.1.1.  Patients who meet self-determination criteria and who have been evaluated by a

paramedic and determined to have a minor medical condition that requires prehospital
care and/or transportation to an Emergency Department may request a release from
further treatment and transport to an Emergency Department only after being advised
of the following:
4.1.1.1.  That Advanced Life Support (ALS) assessment is available and being offered;

and

4.1.1.2.  That ambulance transportation to an Emergency Department and prehospital

care are available and being offered; and

4.1.1.3.  The nature of the condition and the risks associated with refusal of

prehospital care and transportation to an Emergency Department; and

4.1.1.4.  The benefits of prehospital care and transportation to an Emergency

Department; and

4.1.1.5.  The patient should seek medical attention from a private physician or clinic as

indicated; and

4.1.1.6.  That EMS may be reactivated if they should change their mind.

4.1.2.  The attending prehospital provider will review the form (or electronic equivalent) with

the patient and ensure that they understand its content (with appropriate use of
interpreter services if necessary).

4.2.  Patients Refusals with Potentially Significant or Life Threatening Medical Conditions - Against

Medical Advice (AMA)

6

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 4040

EFFECTIVE DATE: 4/1/25

4.2.1.  Patients who meet self-determination criteria and either (1) have been evaluated by a
paramedic and determined to have a significant or potentially life-threatening medical
condition that requires prehospital care and / or transportation to an Emergency
Department or (2) cannot be evaluated due to an unsafe scene (e.g. non-criminal
barricade situation), may request a release from further treatment and transport to an
Emergency Department. Potentially significant or life-threatening medical conditions
include the following:
4.2.1.1.  Chest pain
4.2.1.2.  Shortness of Breath/Dyspnea
4.2.1.3.  Syncope
4.2.1.4.  Seizure
4.2.1.5.  Severe headache
4.2.1.6.  Pregnancy-related complaints
4.2.1.7.  Patients meeting Trauma Center Criteria (including mechanism, see EMSA

Policy # 5001 (Trauma Triage Criteria))

4.2.1.8.  Suspected Gastrointestinal bleed
4.2.1.9.  Markedly abnormal vital signs
4.2.1.10. Signs and symptoms of Stroke/Transient Ischemic Attack
4.2.1.11. Dizziness
4.2.1.12. Any patient for whom an ALS intervention has been performed on-scene

4.2.2.  Every effort should be made to convince the patient to accept treatment and/or
transport.  Be persuasive and use family members or friends if available.

4.2.3.  The attending prehospital provider will review the form (or electronic equivalent) with

the patient and ensure that they understand its content (with appropriate use of
interpreter services if necessary).

5.  BASE HOSPITAL PHYSICIAN CONTACT

5.1.  Prehospital providers may contact the Base Hospital physician for consultation for any patient.
5.1.1.  Base Hospital Physician name must be documented by Prehospital Provider in PCR.
5.2.  If the treating paramedic is fulfilling Continuous Quality Improvement (CQI) requirements or is
doing their first 5 non-transport EMS calls in the San Francisco EMS System, Base Hospital
physician contact must be obtained for all patients who are not transported.

5.3.  Every effort should be made to contact the Base Hospital while the prehospital provider is still

with the patient.

5.4.  Base Hospital physician report should use this format:
5.4.1.  Ambulance Company name and unit ID number
5.4.2.  Prehospital provider ID
5.4.3.  Incident number
5.4.4.  Purpose of the consultation
5.4.5.  Patient age and gender
5.4.6.  Location found

7

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 4040

EFFECTIVE DATE: 4/1/25

5.4.7.  Patient chief complaint
5.4.8.  Vital signs
5.4.9.  Blood glucose and ECG findings if relevant
5.4.10. Patient assessment, pertinent physical exam
5.4.11. Pertinent past medical history
5.4.12. Capacity assessment findings
5.4.13. Patient’s plan for care if any
5.4.14. Prehospital provider’s opinion for disposition

6.  LAW ENFORCEMENT

6.1.  Prehospital Personnel must evaluate patients who are in law enforcement custody (defined as
“under arrest”, “detained”, or “incarcerated”), for whom prehospital personnel are called to
the scene to evaluate, for potential medical care needs.
6.1.1.  A patient in law enforcement custody maintains the right of self-determination for
medical care decisions, including refusals and AMA refusals, and must be treated in
accordance with this policy and applicable EMS Agency treatment procedures.
6.1.2.  Prehospital Personnel must contact a Base Hospital physician before releasing an in-
custody patient who is refusing treatment and/or transport to law enforcement. The
paramedic and Base Hospital physicians shall follow all procedures as outlined in
Section V of this policy.

7.  SITUATIONS WHERE PREHOSPITAL PERSONNEL SAFETY IS THREATENED

7.1.  Prehospital Providers shall make every attempt to not put themselves in harm’s way to treat or

transport a patient.

7.2.  In instances where the safety of the prehospital personnel is in jeopardy and all reasonable
and prudent attempts to mitigate the threat, including law enforcement involvement, have
failed, prehospital personnel may withdraw from the immediate danger area and wait for the
scene to be secure prior to evaluating the patient. In all cases where this provision is
implemented:
7.2.1.  The EMS Provider’s Paramedic Supervisor shall be notified immediately and shall,
within 24 hours, submit documentation to the EMS agency regarding the
circumstances surrounding the decision; and

7.2.2.  The Paramedic Supervisor shall notify the Department of Emergency Management

Duty Officer within 60 minutes of the incident; and

7.2.3.  The EMS Agency shall treat all such incidents as a Sentinel Event.

8.  AUTHORITY

8.1.  California Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, §§ 1797.204, 1798, 1798.6, and

1799.106

8.2.  California Code of Regulations, Title 22, §§ 100091.03, & 100097.02 - 100111.03

8

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 4040

EFFECTIVE DATE: 4/1/25

APPENDIX 1: PATIENT DECLINING TRANSPORT FORM

Patient Declines Transport
I acknowledge that I have a medical problem, which requires additional medical attention, and that
an ambulance is available to transport me to the hospital. Instead, I elect to seek alternative medical
care and refuse further treatment and/or transport. I hereby release, discharge and waive any and all
claims and demands arising out of or in connection with my refusal to accept transport against (1)
the City and County of San Francisco, its officers, agents and employees and (2) the ambulance
service provider.

Patient Name (Print):

Patient Signature:

Witness Name (Print):

Witness Signature:

Date:

Date:

Paramedic or EMT Name (Print):

Paramedic or EMT Signature:

Date:

Paramedic or EMT Name (Print):

Paramedic or EMT Signature:

Date:

Ambulance Company Name:

Circumstances/Reasons for Declining Transport:

Advice given/Alternatives discussed:

9

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 4040

EFFECTIVE DATE: 4/1/25

APPENDIX 2: REFUSALS AGAINST MEDICAL ADVICE FORM

Against Medical Advice (AMA)
I, the undersigned, have been advised that I need medical assistance, and that refusal of this medical
assistance and transport to a hospital may result in my death, or imperil my health. Nevertheless, I
refuse to accept treatment or transport. I assume all risks and consequences of my decision to refuse
treatment or transport.  I hereby release, discharge and waive any and all claims and demands arising
out of or in connection with my refusal to accept treatment or transport against (1) the City and County
of San Francisco, its officers, agents and employees and (2) the ambulance service provider.

Patient Name (Print):

Patient Signature:

Witness Name (Print):

Witness Signature:

Date:

Date:

Paramedic or EMT Name (Print):

Paramedic or EMT Signature:

Date:

Paramedic or EMT Name (Print):

Paramedic or EMT Signature:

Date:

Ambulance Company Name:

Risks of Refusal Discussed with Patient:

Reasons stated by patient for refusing care:

Benefits of Care/Transport Discussed with
Patient:

10

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 4040

EFFECTIVE DATE: 4/1/25

APPENDIX 3: ALS ASSESSMENT CRITERIA

An ALS Assessment shall occur for the following clinical indications. The following list is a
guide and is not comprehensive. If in doubt or unsure whether patient needs an ALS
assessment, care and/or transport, call for an ALS resource to respond.

1.  Abdominal Pain

1.1.  Discomfort, pain, unusual sensations if patient is > 40 years old and has cardiac history
1.2.  Severe generalized abdominal pain

2.  Breathing

2.1.  Respirations > 30 min, abnormal respiratory patterns, patient in tripod position
2.2.  Audible wheezing
2.3.  Need for inhaler or no improvement after self-administration
2.4.  Asthma attack or medical history with need for intubation

3.  Burns

3.1.  All thermal burns except minor heat-related, superficial burns
3.2.  Chemical and/or electrical burns

4.  Cardiac

4.1.  Suspected acute coronary symptoms
4.2.  Irregular heart rate
4.3.  Chest pain

5.  CVA/Stroke

5.1.  Suspected stroke with associated symptoms

6.  Diabetic

6.1.  Patient with history of diabetes with decreased mental status, is unable to swallow, has rapid

respirations, fails to respond to oral glucose, suspected ketoacidosis

7.  Environmental

7.1.  Hypothermia or Hyperthermia with co-morbidities (i.e. elderly, illness, trauma, alcohol and/or

drug-use)

7.2.  Suspected drug-induced hyperthermia

8.  Mental Status

8.1.  Glasgow Coma Score less than or equal to 13
8.2.  Abnormal behavior with unstable vital signs
8.3.  Abnormal behavior with suspected drug or alcohol intoxication
8.4.  Sobering patients that do not meet Policy 5000 “Sobering Services” criteria

9.  Vital Signs

9.1.  Hypotension (Systolic < 90)
9.2.  Signs of shock (Systolic < 90, Pulse > 120)
9.3.  Sustained tachycardia
9.4.  Hypotension and severe bradycardia

10. OB/GYN

10.1. All patients with known or suspected pregnancy with an OB/GYN complaint

11

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 4040

EFFECTIVE DATE: 4/1/25

11. Seizure

11.1. Any seizure or seizure-like activity reported prior to arrival

12. Trauma

12.1. All patients meeting Policy 5001 Trauma Triage Criteria and/or patients meeting base hospital

contact criteria within Policy 5001

12.2. Patients with moderate to severe pain requiring pain control

12

Policy 4040 Flowchart

Engagement with person

DEC dispatch
Onview
Community Paramedicine Non-Emergency/Non-
Medical Encounter
Fire service calls, such as:
Public assist
Lift assist

Does the EMS Provider have a reasonable suspicion of any of the following?

A complaint suggestive of potential illness or injury or,
Obvious evidence of illness or injury or,
Experienced an acute event that could reasonably lead to illness or injury or,
Is in a circumstance or situation that could reasonably lead to illness or injury;
Is experiencing an apparent medical emergency.

YES

Person is a patient

NO

Person is not a patient

Can the patient be accessed in a
safe manner?

YES

Patient consents to treatment or
implied consent?

YES

NO

Leave scene and mandatory
Leave scene and mandatory
exception report (link)
exception report (link)

NO

Is the patient on
a 5150 hold or
LPS
Conservatorship?

YES

NO

Treat with PDT/AMA or
Transport to
appropriate receiving
facility

Does the patient meet the following criteria?

Patient has capacity
Patient is > 18 years old
OR, if <18 years old:

Patient is emancipated
Patient is pregnant and making decisions about pregnancy-related care or reproductive health
Patient is legally married
On duty member of armed forces
A self-sufficient minor >15 years old, living independently and managing own finances

NO

YES

Transport
patient to
hospital

Patient can decline
transport and/or
sign Against
Medical Advice

Safety is paramount for our EMS crews and patients. To determine the best approach to ensure both the needs of the patient are met and the resources
prehospital personnel may need to provide patient care safely, consider the following steps and actions when evaluating each call or scenario.  This is not a
comprehensive list of steps for all circumstances and is listed in no particular order.  EMS clinicians shall use sound clinical judgment and scene management skills.

Prehospital Personnel Resources for Patient Management

Ensure Provider Safety
and Scene Security

Scene safety is paramount for EMS crews and patients. If the scene cannot be made safe or the scene becomes
unsafe, then document, in detail, what was not safe about the scene and what steps were taken to try to
mitigate scene safety. Document what happened to the patient prior to leaving a scene. Employ the following
options to best mitigate safety concerns:

Verbal De-escalation
Utilize responder with the best rapport for communication with the patient
If appropriate, utilize bystanders to communicate with the patient
Request Law Enforcement
Request Engine or Truck
Request EMS Supervisor

•
•
•
•
•
•
Escalate difficult situations/unsecure scenes for review by an EMS Supervisor by calling the EMS Supervisor to
the scene.
Request law enforcement to the scene. If law enforcement does not respond, intervene, nor assist, make sure
to document what happened when law enforcement arrived, their level of involvement, and the outcome.

1.01 Patient Assessment
1.01 Patient Assessment

4041 Scene Management
4041 Scene Management

4043 EMS Use of Physical Restraints
4043 EMS Use of Physical Restraints

4040 VII. B Prehospital Personnel
4040 VII. B Prehospital Personnel
Safety Threatened
Safety Threatened

2052 Paramedic Field Supervisor
2052 Paramedic Field Supervisor
4041 Scene Management
4041 Scene Management

4041 Scene Management
4041 Scene Management
4043 EMS Use of Physical Restraints
4043 EMS Use of Physical Restraints

Request a Base Hospital Physician, assigned to the field rotation, to respond to the scene. This physician can
speak with the patient or provide medical advice while on scene. Document all interactions with a physician
who arrives on scene.

EMSA Memo-New EMS/Base Hospital
EMSA Memo-New EMS/Base Hospital
Physician in the Field Program
Physician in the Field Program

Request the appropriate Community Paramedic Captain to the scene to assist. The Captain can consult and
decide if it is an appropriate response for Street Crisis Response Team or more appropriate resource and/or
respond to the scene directly. A member of the unit may have specialized training to assist with a patient
especially if there are medical, behavioral health, or social needs. The Community Paramedic team may be
able to develop a back-up strategy such as re-engaging with the patient a few hours later or offering other
social resources.
Write a full Patient Care Report (PCR), even if a first response form would be indicated. Include which of the
steps in this Appendix 3 were taken, why the steps were taken, and the outcome of each step. If a step did not
apply to the situation or was not taken, document the rationale. Document quotes from individuals on scene.
Any phone calls/radio communications to dispatch, physicians, and supervisors should be on a recorded line if
possible.
Document the following as applicable:

4041 Scene Management
4041 Scene Management

4040 Patient Consent For and Pt
4040 Patient Consent For and Pt
Refusal of Emergency Medical Care
Refusal of Emergency Medical Care
and Transportation
and Transportation
6020 Incident Reporting
6020 Incident Reporting

Call Supervisor

Call Law Enforcement

Request Base Hospital
Physician in the Field (if
available)

Call Community
Paramedic Captain (e.g.
EMS6, CP5, CP7)

Documentation

PDT, Patient:

AMA

•  Did not activate 911
•  Does not consent to evaluation
•  Does not consent to demographic information
•  Has no obvious signs of trauma/drug or alcohol intoxication
•
•  No obvious medical complaint or signs of distress
•
•

Is speaking in clear speech

Self-ambulates from scene with a steady gait (or at baseline mobility status)
Is offered evaluation, treatment, and transport

•  Advised to activate 911 if any change of decision

•  Multiple attempts at de-escalation
•
•
•

Law enforcement contacted for scene management per Policy 4041
Community Paramedic Captain contacted
Law enforcement denies request to assist physical restraint of
patient
Community Paramedic Captain or Field RC to assist crew filling out
Sentinel Event

•

•  Request Base Hospital Physician in the Field through DEC if available

and the patient is still on scene

