SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

Policy Reference No.:  4041

Effective Date:  February 1, 2009
Review Date:  February 1, 2011
Supersedes:  New

SCENE MANAGEMENT, PHYSICIAN ON SCENE and MASS GATHERINGS

I.  PURPOSE

A.  To define roles and responsibilities and establish hierarchy of each level and

type of responder at the scene of a medical emergency, mass gathering, and/or
special event. This policy applies to the following roles:
1.  First Responders, Basic Life Support (BLS),
2.  Emergency Medical Technician-I (EMT-1),
3.  Advanced Life Support (ALS) prehospital providers,
4.  Emergency Medical Technician-Paramedic (EMT-P), and
5.  Physicians on scene of medical emergencies.

II.  AUTHORITY

A.  California Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, Sections 1797.202,

1797.204, 1797.220 and 1798-1798.6

B.  California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Sections 100063, 100144, 100147,

100144, 100167)a) and 100169100172 – 100175

C.  California Medical Association, Endorsed Actions for Physicians on Scene

with Paramedics

D.  City and County of San Francisco Traffic Code sections 8000, 801, 802, 804

and Administrative Code Section 90.4

III.  POLICY AND PROCEDURES

A.  Scene Management

1.  Scope of Practice

a)  While on the scene of an emergency, prehospital personnel

shall manage the medical care of patients within their scope of
practice and in coordination with all other personnel on scene.

b)  Prehospital personnel shall provide care in accordance with

EMS Agency Treatment Protocols appropriate to the level of
certification or licensure of the individual providing care.
c)  Prehospital personnel shall not deviate from EMS Agency

Treatment Protocols or policies without specific permission to
do so from the EMS Agency Medical Director or his/her
designee.

Page 1

Policy Reference No.:  4041

Effective Date:  February 1, 2009

2.  Medical Authority

a)  Paramedics have medical authority over EMT-1s, First

Responders, and law enforcement personnel.

b)  All personnel have a duty to act and must continue to provide

appropriate care to the patient within the scope of their
certification or licensure.

c)  Transporting Paramedics shall assume medical authority upon
arrival after receiving a verbal report from a non-transport
Paramedic on scene.

d)  If there is a disagreement between medical personnel on scene
about the medical management of patients, the Base Hospital
Physician will be contacted immediately and the most
conservative patient-based decision shall prevail until
consultation with the Base Hospital Physician is completed and
further instruction conveyed.

(1) If the disagreement occurs between providers of

different agencies, all providers will remain on scene
and continue to care for the patient(s) up to and
including providing transport with another agency’s
personnel in charge if so directed by the Base Hospital
Physician.

e)  First Responders and BLS personnel may allow properly
identified medical personnel to assist with the care of the
patient, but shall maintain medical authority prior to the arrival
of a Paramedic.

3.  Procedure for Scene Management
a)  Coordination of Medical Care

(1) Prehospital personnel shall enter a scene and begin

providing care only if a scene is determined to be safe.
(a)  Law enforcement or other assistance to mitigate
identified hazards will be requested as needed to
secure a scene.

(b) If necessary, EMS personnel shall withdraw

from any scene where an immediate hazard is
identified and wait for appropriate assistance to
arrive before entering.

(2) Upon arrival, the most medically qualified personnel
shall assume responsibility for the medical care of the
patient.

(3) First responder personnel, both ALS and BLS, shall

initiate and continue care for patients until the arrival of
transport personnel.

(a)  On arrival of transport personnel, BLS first

responders will immediately provide a verbal
report to the most medically qualified person.

Page 2

Policy Reference No.:  4041

Effective Date:  February 1, 2009

(b)  ALS first responders will provide a verbal

report to ALS transport personnel as soon as
possible.

(c)  First response personnel shall remain on scene
and assist transport personnel with patient care
until the primary patient care person on the
transport crew releases the first responders.

(d)  When first response and transport ALS

personnel arrive simultaneously, the transport
Paramedic will assume responsibility for, and
direct, patient care.

(4) In cases where conflict regarding patient care exists

between Paramedics on-scene and there is a belief that
a negligent act or policy deviation that will harm the
patient is about to, or has occurred, then the Paramedic
with that belief shall initiate the following actions:

(a)  The Base Hospital Physician will be contacted
immediately and have final authority over
patient care decisions;

(b)  All parties will remain on scene and work under

the direction of the Base Hospital Physician to
effect care and transport of the patient;
(i)  If directed by the Base Hospital
Physician, the initiating Paramedic will
assume responsibility for patient care and
accompany the patient during transport,
which may be done in an on-scene
ambulance, regardless of agency affiliations.

(c)  Incident shall be reported to the on-duty

Paramedic Field Supervisors or all agencies
involved, and

(d)  The initiating Paramedic will file a Sentinel

Event report with the EMS Agency within 24
hours of the incident.

b)  Change in the Code of Responding Units
(1) Cancellation of responding units

(a)  First arriving ALS and BLS personnel shall

cancel other responding units when:

(i) it is determined that the patient is not at

the scene; or

(ii) the patient is determined dead and

cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) is
withheld or terminated in accordance
with EMS Agency Policy  #4050, Death
in the Field; or

Page 3

Policy Reference No.:  4041

Effective Date:  February 1, 2009

(iii) transport personnel arrive first and

determine that no assistance is necessary
from other responders.
(b)  After completing the primary and secondary
patient exam and establishing the chief
complaint, an ALS first responder may cancel
the responding transport unit if it is determined
that the patient will not be transported by
ambulance.

(2) Upgrading or downgrading responding units

(a)  Prehospital personnel on-scene of a prehospital
emergency incident may request a change in the
response of responding units. All such requests
will be routed through the provider’s dispatch or
the Emergency Communications Department
(ECD), whichever is most appropriate.
(b)  Prehospital personnel on-scene with a patient
may request a downgraded response of an
ambulance after determining that no life
threatening condition exists and that the time
saved from lights and siren use would not likely
impact patient outcome.

(c)  Prehospital personnel on scene with a patient
shall request an upgraded response upon
determination that a life threatening condition
exists, or that any delay in transport or arrival of
ALS may impact patient outcome.

c)  Patient transport

(1) A second Paramedic shall accompany the patient in the

ambulance to the hospital under the following
situations:
(a)  Cardiopulmonary arrest
(b) Patients in cardiac arrest or those who are post-

arrest with return of spontaneous circulation in the
field

(c)  Airway obstruction or respiratory insufficiency with

inadequate ventilation
(d) Hypotension with shock
(e)  Status epilepticus
(f)  Acute deteriorating level of consciousness
(g) The transport Paramedic requests assistance during

transport due to the patient’s condition
(h) The First Response Paramedic believes it is

necessary for patient care

(i)  A Paramedic field supervisor determines it is

necessary.

Page 4

Policy Reference No.:  4041

Effective Date:  February 1, 2009

(2) A first response Paramedic should strongly be

considered as a necessity with any patient requiring a
lights and siren transport.

d)  “On-Viewed” Incidents

(1) On-view refers to a situation in which a provider,

during the normal course of business, arrives first on
scene of an EMS incident without being dispatched or
otherwise assigned to it.

(a)  This section also applies to situations in which a
transport-capable ALS vehicle is dispatched as a
first responder.

(2) ALS units

(a)  Report the location of the incident to the ECD

and ascertain if a unit is responding.

(b)  If no unit is responding, and the unit on scene is
available, that unit will establish patient contact
and manage the incident in accordance with
EMS Agency Policy to include transport, if
indicated.

(c)  If a unit is responding, establish patient contact
and render aid until such time as the responding
unit arrives.

(i)  If the patient is unstable and the ETA to
definitive care is shorter than the ETA of
the assigned unit, the patient should be
transported without delay.

(ii) In all cases where this option is selected,
the transporting provider’s Medical
Director will complete a clinical review
of the situation and determine if
immediate transport was indicated and
forward that review to the responding
provider.

(a)  If a disagreement exists as to the

necessity of immediate transport, an
Exception Report along with all
supporting documentation should be
filed with the EMS Agency.

(3) BLS Units

(a)  Report the location of the incident to the ECD

and request an ALS unit be assigned.

(b) Establish patient contact and render aid until the

ALS unit arrives.

Page 5

Policy Reference No.:  4041

Effective Date:  February 1, 2009

e)  BLS Units on Scene of ALS Acuity Patients

(1) This procedure applies to patients encountered by BLS
units outside of acute care facilities. If, during an
interfacility transfer, a BLS unit encounters a patient
that may require a level of care they are unable to
provide, the BLS personnel should consult with the
transferring physician and their supervisor.

(a)  An acute care facility is defined as a facility

recognized as a general or critical care hospital.
(2) BLS units on scene of the following shall immediately

request an ALS unit to respond:

(a)  Acute abnormalities of airway, breathing, or

circulation that are changes from the patient’s
baseline status

(b)  ALOC that is an acute change from the patient’s

baseline
(c)  Chest pain
(d)  Cardiac arrest
(e)  Motor vehicle accidents
(f)  Obstetric emergencies
(g)  Pediatric patients
(h)  Seizures
(i)  Specialty care patients (i.e., burns)
(j)  Trauma patients requiring the trauma center and
(k)  Any patient who, in the judgment of the
attending EMT-1, would benefit from
evaluation or treatment by a Paramedic.

(3) BLS units on scene of unstable patients shall ascertain
the ETA of the closest ALS unit and determine the
ETA, including patient packaging and extrication, to
the closest Receiving Hospital.

(a)  If the ETA of the ALS unit is shorter, BLS units
shall stay on scene and render aid, turning over
care when the ALS unit arrives.

(b)  If the ETA including patient packaging and

extrication to the closest Receiving Hospital is
shorter, the BLS shall transport the patient Code
3 to that hospital.

f)  Documentation

(1) An EMS Agency approved Prehospital Care Record
(PCR) shall be completed for each patient contact.

Page 6

Policy Reference No.:  4041

Effective Date:  February 1, 2009

(2) The person primarily responsible for directing patient
care on scene and during transport will complete the
report.

(3) All procedures noted on the PCR shall be accompanied

by the identification (Paramedic number) of the
Paramedic who performed the procedure.

B.  Physician On-Scene

1.  A Paramedic may not accept direction from any source except the

Base Hospital Physician, except under the following circumstances:

a)  a qualified physician on scene agrees to direct patient care and

accompany the patient to the hospital; and

b)  Physician direction is within the Paramedic Scope of Practice.

2.  A qualified physician is any physician licensed in the State of

California.

3.  Do Not Resuscitate (DNR) Decisions

a)  An on-scene physician, after identifying himself/herself as the
patient's physician, may issue a written DNR order which
emergency medical services (EMS) personnel may follow. This
order should preferably be written directly on the PCR and
followed by Base Hospital Physician consultation for approval
(reference EMS Agency Policy # 4051, DNR Policy, Section
V.A.4.).

(1) In this circumstance, the Base Hospital
physician may waive the requirement for the
physician to accompany the patient during
ambulance transport.

4.  Procedure for Physician On-Scene of a Prehospital Call

a)  The Paramedic shall:

(1) Verify identity and credentials of the on-scene
physician. A physician must produce a current
California medical license, and show it to the
Paramedic with a valid photo ID demonstrating that
he/she is the person whose name is on the medical
license.

(2) Advise the physician of the options as described below;
(3) Contact the Base Hospital Physician for consultation or

conflict resolution as needed.

b)  Physician Options:

(1) Assist and offer advice regarding patient care, but allow
the Paramedics to remain in control of the scene and
transport the patient according to EMS Agency Policy;
or

(2) Consult with the Base Hospital Physician and offer
advice on the care of the patient, allowing the Base
Hospital Physician to direct care and transport; or

Page 7

Policy Reference No.:  4041

Effective Date:  February 1, 2009

(3) Accompany the patient to the hospital and assume total
responsibility for patient care until this responsibility is
assumed by the receiving physician.

(a)  In this case, the Paramedics will assist the

physician as requested provided they operate
within the standard of care and the Scope of
Practice.

(b)  Paramedics will advise the Base Hospital

Physician of the situation.

(c)  All orders given by the on-scene physician shall
be documented on the PCR and signed by the
physician.

(d)  The physician’s name and contact information

will be documented on the PCR.

C.  Mass Gathering and/or Special Events

1.  In mass gatherings where physicians are present as part of an organized
system of providing care on site, Paramedics may provide care with
these physicians according to site-specific scene protocols.

a)  Patients at these sites who are physically seen and assessed by
the designated mass-gathering physician are the responsibility
of that physician and should be treated accordingly.

(1) Paramedics may assist in treatments that do not exceed
their Scope of Practice under the direct supervision of
the designated mass-gathering physician on site.
(2) Paramedics may transfer care of stable patients who

were injured or became ill on-site and were cared for by
Paramedics assigned to the event, to the on-site
physician provided that:

(a)  The on-site physician accepts the transfer of

care; and

(b) There are adequate resources (facility,

equipment, etc.) on-site to care for the patient.

b)  Once 9-1-1 is activated and Paramedics not assigned to the

event arrive at the scene, the arriving Paramedics will follow
the guidelines in Section III.A. and B. of this policy.

2.  Patients who are not physically seen and assessed by the designated

mass-gathering physician but who are assessed by Paramedics, are the
responsibility of those Paramedics who must follow relevant Standard
Treatment Protocols and EMS system policies, including releases
Against Medical Advice (AMA).

a)  Conflict resolution: In the event conflict arises regarding a
patient care issue, the Paramedics and mass-gathering
physician will attempt to resolve it. In cases where resolution is
not forthcoming, the Base Hospital Physician will be contacted
and will have final authority over medical care to be provided
by responding Paramedics.

Page 8

