SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

Policy Reference No.:  4051
Effective Date:  January 30, 2017
Supersedes:  January 1, 2011

DO NOT RESUSCITATE &
PHYSICIAN ORDERS FOR LIFE-SUSTAINING TREATMENT

I.

PURPOSE

To establish procedures for San Francisco EMS personnel to recognize and follow valid
Do Not Resuscitate (DNR) and Physician Orders for Life-Sustaining Treatment (POLST)
directives and to ensure that a  patient’s decision for end of life care are honored.

II.  DEFINITION

Prehospital Do Not Resuscitate (DNR) Form:  An official document from the California
EMS Authority and the California Medical Association to provide a standardized form for
EMS personnel regarding a patient's decision to forgo resuscitative measures in the
event of cardiopulmonary arrest.

Physician Orders for Life-Sustaining Treatment (POLST) Form: An official document
from the California EMS Authority and the Coalition for Compassionate Care of
California is a medical order that gives seriously ill patients more control over their final
care by specifying the type of medical treatment they wish to receive at the end of life.

III.

POLICY

A.  This policy applies to San Francisco EMS personnel (First Responders, EMTs and
paramedics) while responding to 911 or private emergency medical calls, non-
emergency medical calls, and inter-facility transports for adult patients 18 years or
greater, including those in long-term care and hospice programs.

B.  All cardiac arrest patients in a prehospital setting shall have cardio-pulmonary

resuscitation (CPR) initiated by San Francisco EMS personnel unless a valid DNR directive
is present  and the procedures outlined in this policy are followed OR the patient is
otherwise determined dead according to EMS Agency Policy #4050, Death in the Field. If
patient has a valid Do Not Resuscitate status as defined in this policy, that patient must
to be offered palliative care up to the point of providing ALS resuscitation.

IV.  APPROVED FORMS

A.  Statewide Emergency Medical Services Authority (EMSA)/California Medical

Association (CMA) Prehospital DNR Form (Appendix A) Must be signed and dated by
the patient's physician, the patient or by the patient's legally recognized health care
decision maker if the patient is unable to communicate informed health care decisions.
Photocopies and faxes are acceptable.

Page 1

Policy Reference No.: 4051
Effective Date:  January 30, 2017

B.  Physician Orders for Life Sustaining Treatment (POLST)  Form (Appendix B) Must be
signed and dated by the patient's physician, the patient or by the patient's legally
recognized health care decision maker if the patient is unable to communicate
informed health care decisions.  The form on any color paper is valid (printing the
original form on pink-colored paper is recommended to make it standout).  Copies and
faxes are acceptable.

C.  California EMS Authority approved DNR/POLST medallion or bracelet (Appendix C):

Approved medallions or bracelets must include:

1.  24/7 toll free telephone number,
2.  Inscribed on the medallion/bracelet” “CALIFORNIA DO NOT

RESUSCITATE – EMS”, or;  “CALIFORNIA DNR – EMS”, or “POLST”

3.  An individual specific identification number used to identify the

enrollee’s medical information on file.

There are two approved California approved medallion providers for the prehospital
DNR/POLST medallions:

MedicAlert Foundation
www.medicalert.org
(888) 633-4298
2323 Colorado Ave.
Turlock, CA 95382

Caring Advocates
www.caringadvocate.org
(800) 647-3223
2730 Argonauta St.
Carlsbad, CA 92009

V.

PROCEDURES  WHEN VALID DNR / POLST DIRECTIVE PRESENT

A.  Identify that the patient is the person named in the DNR directive through a reliable

witness or the presence of a picture identification or band/tag.

B.  Supportive palliative care and transport shall be provided to all patients with a DNR

directive who are not in need of immediate resuscitation.

C.  EMS personnel shall ignore the DNR directive and provide care according to protocol
and need if the patient is conscious and states he/she want resuscitative measures.

D.  CPR may be withheld or discontinued when responding to a pulseless and apneic patient

with the following approved valid DNR /POLST directives:
1.  Statewide Emergency Medical Services Authority (EMSA)/California Medical

Association (CMA) Prehospital DNR Form

2.  Physician Orders for Life Sustaining Treatment (POLST)  Form.

3.  An approved DNR/POLST medallion/bracelet worn by the patient inscribed with the

words: “Do Not Resuscitate.” The inscribed toll-free telephone number may be called
to access the advance directives.  EMS personnel should follow the DNR/POLST
medallion/bracelet whether the patient is conscious or not conscious, unless

2

Policy Reference No.: 4051
Effective Date:  January 30, 2017

circumstances indicate that it does not belong to the patient or does not represent
the patient's wishes. The same procedures as outlined for the paper forms should be
followed for a DNR/POLST medallion or bracelet.

4.  When responding to a licensed health facility, a written DNR order signed by a

physician in the patient’s medical record. Document in the field PCR the presence of
a physician signed DNR from the facility records along with date of the order, and
the physician's name.

5.  EMS personnel may accept only a written DNR order from a physician present on-

scene in a non-health care setting and who reasonably identifies himself/herself as
the patient's physician.  This order should preferably be written directly on the PCR
and followed by Base Physician consultation for approval.

E.  CPR may be discontinued without Base Hospital contact if a valid DNR/POLST directive is

located by EMS personnel after CPR has commenced.

F.  If any question exists regarding the validity of the DNR directive or other advanced

directives, or if there is any disagreement by the patient's family members or caretakers
as to honoring the DNR/POLST directive.  EMS personnel should initiate BLS, treat the
patient in accordance with applicable treatment guidelines, and immediately contact
the Base Hospital physician for further instructions.

G.  DNR directives are honored during an inter-facility transport.  If a patient dies while en

route, transport of the body should continue to the designated receiving facility.

H.  EMS personnel shall document the presence of a DNR/POLST directive or

medallion/bracelet on the prehospital care record.

I.  Copies of the DNR/POLST directive should be attached to the field PCR. If the patient is

transported, a copy of the form should be taken with the patient to the receiving facility
and given to the facility staff.

J.

If an ambulance provider dispatch center is informed about a DNR/POLST directive, the
dispatcher shall instruct the caller to get the directive and present it to the emergency
responders when they arrive. Caller information that a patient has a DNR directive does
not change the ambulance or fire department response code.

J.  First responders may cancel or downgrade the ambulance response if the patient is
pulseless and apneic and there is a DNR directive.  Otherwise, the ambulance shall
respond as dispatched.

3

Policy Reference No.: 4051
Effective Date:  January 30, 2017

VI.

PROCEDURES WHEN NO DNR / POLST DIRECTIVE OR OTHER DIRECTIVES PRESENT

A.  Resuscitation may be withheld or stopped if it has already been initiated if a DNR
directive is not present at the scene, but a person who is present and who can be
identified as a spouse, immediate family member(s) or guardian requests no
resuscitation and has the full agreement of any other family members present on
scene. Contact the Base Hospital Physician if there is any disagreement between the
spouse, immediate family member(s) or guardian.

B .  Other advance directives such as "Living Wills," or directives from other sources (e.g.
California Natural Death Act/Declaration or Physician Documentation of Preferred
Intensity of Treatment) form are not valid for prehospital personnel. Contact the Base
Hospital to determine whether these may be used to guide patient therapy.

C.  Durable Power of Attorney for Health Care (DPAHC):  EMS personnel encountering a

person claiming to be the designated "Attorney In Fact" for the patient at the scene of
an emergency, must first verify that person’s identification and then ask to see the
written power of attorney form to verify that the person is the “Attorney In Fact.” Verify
that the DPAHC document authorizes the “Attorney In Fact” to make a DNR directive for
the patient.

VII.

AUTHORITY
California Health and Safety Code Section 1797.220 and 1798
California Probate Code Section 4780

VIII.

REFERENCES
•  California EMS Authority Guidelines #111 - 5th Revision,” Do Not Resuscitate and

Other Patient Designated Directives,” January 2016.

•  Coalition for Compassionate Care of California.  www.coalitionccc.org
•  POLST California.   http://capolst.org

4

SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

Policy Reference No.:  4051
Effective Date:  January 30, 2017
Supersedes:  January 1, 2011

APPENDIX A- EMSA/CMA APPROVED PREHOSPITAL DNR FORM

Page 1

Policy Reference No.: 4051
Effective Date:  January 30, 2017

2

APPENDIX B- EMSA APPROVED POLST FORM

Policy Reference No.: 4051
Effective Date:  January 30, 2017

3

Policy Reference No.: 4051
Effective Date:  January 30, 2017

4

APPENDIX C – EMSA APPROVED DNR MEDALLIONS

Policy Reference No.: 4051
Effective Date:  January 30, 2017

5

