SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

Policy Reference No.: 4070
Effective Date: October 1, 2022
Supersedes:  August 1, 2008

CRITICAL CARE TRANSPORT PARAMEDIC (CCP)

I.  PURPOSE

A.  To establish the criteria and process for gaining approval to provide a Critical Care
Transport by Paramedic Optional Scope Program in the City and County of San
Francisco.

II.  PROGRAM OVERVIEW

A.  San Francisco has adopted the regional Bay Area Critical Care Paramedic (BACCP)

multijurisdictional standards and scope of practice (version 1).

B.  Should a conflict exist between regional BACCP standards and scope of practice and
local standards, local directives shall supersede or prevail over regional standards.

III.  REQUEST AND APPROVAL

A.  Application Process

1.  The applicant must also be permitted to operate as an ALS provider in the

City and County of San Francisco.

2.  Permitted ALS providers shall submit a letter of intent including the following

material to the EMS Agency for approval:

3.  A copy of the organization’s interfacility transport program to include:

i.  Name(s) and qualification(s) of the Medical Director overseeing the

provider CCP program

ii.  CCP Quality Improvement Plan that fulfills the requirements under

Policy 6000 Quality Assurance Program

iii.  Procedure for submission of the data to the EMS Agency for all CCP

transport

iv.  Program curriculum
v.  CE on going training program curriculum and schedule
vi.  Draft PCR for approval
vii. List of all CCP ambulances being permitted
viii. Proof of meeting all requirements as listed in BACCP standards and

scope of practice

B.  Upon receipt, application materials will be reviewed for completeness. If any required

documentation is missing, the applicant will be notified, in writing, within fourteen (14)
business days. Missing  information shall be submitted within thirty (30) calendar days.
Failure to submit the missing information within thirty (30) calendar days will require
the applicant to reapply.

Page 1

Policy Reference No.: 4070
Effective Date: October 1, 2022

C.  An inspection of the applicant’s ambulance will be conducted to ensure that the vehicle
is equipped to the minimum standards outlines in Policy 4001 Vehicle Equipment and
Supply List and BACCP standards.

D.  CCP vehicles shall be permitted to ALS standards in Policy 4001 with the addition of CCP

equipment as listed in BACCP standards.

E.  The applicant will receive written notification within thirty (30) calendar days of request

for program approval.

F.  Approval is valid for four (4) years from the authorization not including periodic

monitoring by the EMS Agency. It is the responsibility of the approved provider to notify
the EMS Agency, in writing, of any intent to discontinue the program or any substantial
changes in the original application such as change in key program personnel (e.g.
Medical Director, QI staff, and/or management).

IV. STAFFING

A.  A CCP Unit is a fully equipped and permitted advanced life support ambulance, staffed

with a minimum of two (2) authorized staff that includes:

1.  One CCP Paramedic and one EMT

i.  CCP Paramedic shall meet requirements as listed in BACCP Section 2,

Policy 2000, and Policy 4070 subsection V, 2.

ii.  EMT shall meet requirements as listed in BACCP Section 2, Policy

2000, and subsection VI, 2.
b.  Two Paramedics with a minimum of one CCP

i.  CCP Paramedic shall meet requirements as listed in BACCP Section 2,

Policy 2000, and Policy 4070 subsection V, 2.

ii.  If a non-CCP Paramedic is utilized, the non-CCP Paramedic shall be

Accredited in San Francisco according to Policy 2050.

B.  CCP Paramedic Local Accreditation to Practice

1.  CCP Paramedics working for an approved San Francisco CCP provider are

authorized perform point-to-point CCP interfacility transfers in San Francisco
via one of the following options:

2.  Option 1: Current local Accreditation in San Francisco pursuant to Policy 2050

i.  Obtain a San Francisco Accreditation Card AND a San Francisco CCP

Card by submitting an application.

ii.  Under this option, the CCP is approved to respond to 911 calls in San
Francisco with an approved 911 ALS Provider should the unit have an
ambulance permit.

3.  Option 2: Current local Accreditation in a BACCP county

i.  Complete a San Francisco EMS Agency approved orientation training
for a minimum of eight (8) hours including radio use, base hospital
contact, hospital destinations, and specialty center designations.
ii.  Under this option, the CCP is NOT approved to respond to 911 calls in

San Francisco.

Page 2

Policy Reference No.: 4070
Effective Date: October 1, 2022

4.  An initial applicant for a San Francisco CCP credential, applicants shall submit

copies of the following:

i.  State of California Paramedic Licensure
ii.  Driver’s License
iii.  San Francisco Accreditation (or another LEMSA in which the ALS

service provider is based)

iv.  Proof of CCP course completion
v.  Current IBSC, Board for Critical Care Transport Paramedic Certification

(BCCTPC)

vi.  Expiration will be based on License/Accreditation OR BCCTPC

expiration date, whichever is first

5.  A renewal applicant for a San Francisco CCP credential, applicants shall

submit copies of the follow:

i.  State of California Paramedic Licensure
ii.  Driver’s License
iii.  San Francisco Accreditation (or another LEMSA in which the ALS

service provider is based)

iv.  Current IBSC, Board for Critical Care Transport Paramedic Certification

(BCCTPC)

v.  Expiration will be based on License/Accreditation OR BCCTPC

expiration date, whichever is first

V.  PERSONNEL AND TRAINING REQUIREMENTS

A.  Critical Care Paramedics

1.  Training Program Content

i.  The provider shall develop or identify training and orientation

programs for CCP personnel, which include didactic, clinical and
training requirements. The EMS Agency Medical Director shall
approve training and orientation programs prior to providing such
training.

ii.  The Provider shall conduct training as listed in BACCP standards,

including all Title 22 content.

2.  Recurring Training Content
3.  Complete at least twenty-four (24) continuing education hour’s per-year,

approved by the EMS Agency and delivered by the provider agency, specific
to knowledge and skills used on CCP transfers AND additional training for
local optional scope additions.

B.  EMTs Assigned to CPP units

1.  EMTs assigned to CCP units shall meet the requirements identified in BACCP

Standards

2.  The course curriculum shall be delivered by the EMS provider’s training

program and approved in advance by the EMS Agency

Page 3

Policy Reference No.: 4070
Effective Date: October 1, 2022

3.  Complete at least four (4) continuing education hour’s per-year, approved by
the EMS Agency and delivered by the provider agency, specific to knowledge
and skills used on CCP transfers AND additional training for local optional
scope additions.
C.  CCP Provider Requirements

1.  The provider agency shall maintain a list of all staff working on a CCP unit and
shall see that this list is updated whenever there is a change in personnel
2.  The organization shall retain on file, at all times, copies of current and valid

credentials for all personnel performing service under this program.

3.  The organization must be a San Francisco EMS Agency approved CE provider.

VI. MEDICAL DIRECTION

A.  Personnel assigned to a CCP unit work under the existing medical control system and
follows San Francisco EMS prehospital policies and protocols, as approved by the EMS
Medical Director. San Francisco has adopted the regional Bay Area Critical Care
Paramedic (BACCP) multijurisdictional standards and scope of practice (version 1).
B.  The transferring physician specifies standing orders for a patient based on skills and

medications included in the BACCP paramedic basic, optional, and CCP expanded scope
of practice.

C.  The EMS Agency Medical Director has overall responsibility for the medical control for

all paramedics and EMTs within the City and County of San Francisco.

D.  Medical control is exercised through policies, protocols, and training established and

approved by the EMS Medical Director.

E.  When a patient’s treatment/care is beyond the CCP scope of practice, that patient may

be transported only in accordance with Policy 5030, Interfacility Transfers.

F.  Critical Care Transports by CCPs shall be conducted in accordance to Policy 5030.

VII. DOCUMENTATION AND QUALITY IMPROVEMENT

A.  A written or electronic Patient Care Report (PCR) shall be completed for each patient.
1.  The PCR shall contain information regarding the call demographics, patient

assessment, care rendered and patient response to care

2.  A copy of the PCR shall be given to the receiving facility prior to the transfer

unit departing the facility.

3.  If the patient is turned over to a 9-1-1 system unit, a copy of the PCR shall be
sent with the patient as time permits. If the PCR cannot be completed prior
to patient transport, the CCP paramedic shall complete the PCR and fax it to
the Emergency Department of the nearest facility as soon as possible.

4.  A copy of each PCR, transferring physician orders and related documentation

shall be submitted to the EMS Agency upon request.

5.  100% PCR review of all CCP calls shall take place by the CCP Provider Agency
6.  CCP Providers shall submit an initial Quality Improvement plan with annual

updates.

Page 4

Policy Reference No.: 4070
Effective Date: October 1, 2022

VIII.

CCP TRAINING PROGRAM COURSE CONTENT

A.  The provider shall develop or identify training and orientation programs for CCP

personnel, which include didactic, clinical and training requirements. The EMS Agency
Medical Director shall approve training and orientation programs prior to providing such
training.

B.  The Provider shall conduct training as listed in BACCP standards, including all Title 22

content.

IX.  AMBULANCE INVENTORY REQUIRMENTS

A.  CCP ambulance equipment and supply requirements are specified in Policy 4001,

Vehicle Equipment and Supply List and BACCP standards.

B.  A CCP Ambulance shall not operate without required equipment.
C.  For equipment failure, an Exception Report shall be submitted within 72 hours or 3

business days.

X.  AUTHORITY

A.  Health and Safety Code Sections: 1797.172, 1797.185, 1797.196, and 1798.150
B.  California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Sections: 100137, 100142, 100144, 100146,

100149, and 100155

Page 5

