SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

Policy Reference No.: 4072
Effective Date: 02/03/20
Supersedes: 10/01/11

BARIATRIC PATIENT TRANSPORTS

I.  PURPOSE

A.  To establish standards for the transport of bariatric patients that assures their comfort,

safety and dignity.

B.  To authorize the temporary use of non-permitted bariatric ambulances to operate in the

San Francisco EMS system for the transport of bariatric patients.

II.  AUTHORITY

A.  California Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, Sections 1797.204, 1797.206, 1797.222,
1798.170, and 1798.172

B.  California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Sections 100063, 100145, 100147, 100172,
100175, and 100266

C.

III.   DEFINITIONS

A.  Bariatric Patient: A patient weighing > 350 pounds and/or has a body habitus that

exceeds the capacity standards for a normal ambulance gurney in either height, width
or both.

B.  Bariatric Ambulance: Specially equipped ambulances specifically designed for the

transport of bariatric patients.

IV. POLICY

A.  Bariatric ambulances not permitted by the City and County of San Francisco, which are
operated by a company possessing an ALS or BLS permit from the San Francisco EMS
Agency, are authorized to temporarily operate within the San Francisco EMS system for
the purposes of transporting bariatric patients when it is determined by either an
ambulance provider, hospital or other health institution provider to be in the best
interest of patient safety.

B.  Non-San Francisco permitted bariatric ambulances must be permitted by the California
Highway Patrol, and if applicable, by the local EMS agency from which the ambulance
originates.

C.  Ambulance personnel must be knowledgeable about the extrication and transport
needs for bariatric patients that assures for their comfort, safety and dignity.

Page 1

Policy Reference No.: 4072
Effective Date: 02/03/20
Supersedes: 10/01/11

D.  Bariatric patients meeting the critical patient triage criteria as defined in Policies 5000
Destination or 5001 Critical Trauma Criteria should be transported to an appropriate
receiving hospital as rapidly as possible whether or not a bariatric ambulance is
available.  Ambulance crews may request assistance from SFFD.

E.  Medically stable bariatric patients may be held at the scene until a bariatric transport

ambulance becomes available. Required transport times from the scene to a hospital as
identified in EMS Agency Policy 4000 Pre-hospital Provider Standards are waived as long
as the bariatric patient remains medically stable. At no time should the patient be
unattended by medical personnel.  If necessary, additional staff should be arranged to
attend to the patient.  At a minimum, this shall be an EMT with a defibrillator and an
800 MHz radio.

V.  PROCEDURES

A.  Any field crew may request a bariatric ambulance through the Division of Emergency
Communications (DEC). DEC will contact the private ambulance providers for an
available bariatric ambulance.

B.  If necessary during 9-1-1 calls, the transporting unit may request additional assistance

from the SFFD in order to safely extricate and load a patient.

C.  Private ambulance company crews for inter-facility transports will request a bariatric-

equipped ambulance through their respective dispatch centers.  Proper equipment and
the proper number of personnel necessary to handle the patient safely must be assured.
If an extraordinary situation arises with little or no advance notice, and with the
approval of a Paramedic Captain, the SFFD may be asked to assist.

Page 2

