SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

Policy Reference No.: 5010
Effective Date: July 11, 2022
Supersedes:  January 3, 2022

RECEIVING HOSPITAL STANDARDS

I.  PURPOSE

A.  Establish minimum standards for all San Francisco EMS approved receiving

hospitals.

B.  Integrate receiving hospitals into the EMS system as stakeholders in the

planning, design, and delivery of Emergency Medical Services.

C.  Provide a mechanism for receiving hospitals to communicate with the EMS

Agency and other system participants.

II.  AUTHORITY

A.  Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, Section 164.512 (b) (l) (i)
B.  California Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, Sections 1797.67, 1797.204,

1797.222, 1797.250, 1797.252, 1798, 1798.150, and 1799.205.

C.  California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Sections 100172, 100175, 70411-

70419, and 70451 – 70459.

D.  Joint Commission on Accreditation of Health Care Organizations, Emergency

Department Standards

III.  POLICY

A.  General Requirements

1.  All receiving hospitals must have a written agreement with the San
Francisco EMS Agency to be recognized as an approved destination
for ambulances transporting prehospital patients.

2.  All receiving hospitals shall meet all Federal, State, and local

requirements to be recognized as a Comprehensive Emergency
Department, Basic Emergency Department, or Standby Emergency
Department.

3.  Receiving Hospitals shall be accredited by the Joint Commission on

Accreditation of Health Care Organizations.

4.  Medical Control of Advanced Life Support personnel shall be the sole

responsibility of the Base Hospital.

5.  Receiving hospitals shall comply with all EMS Agency Policies and
develop internal policies compelling hospital personnel to comply
with EMS Agency policies when their work relates to the EMS system.

6.  Receiving Hospitals that are not designated Specialty Receiving

Centers, e.g. STAR Receiving Centers, Stroke Centers, Trauma Centers
or Pediatric Critical Care Centers, shall have in place rapid transfer

Page 1 of 10

Policy Reference No.: 5010
Effective Date: July 11, 2022

protocols, policies or procedures so that patients who need theses
specialty receiving centers can access them rapidly.

7.  Receiving Hospitals shall pay all required and associated fees within

30 days of being invoiced by the EMS Agency.

B.  Personnel

1.  Medical Director

a)  The ED Medical Director shall be a physician certified or

qualified by training and experience for examination by the
American Board of Emergency Medicine.

2.  ED Physicians with direct patient care responsibilities

a)  Must be Board Eligible, Board Prepared, or Board Certified in
Emergency Medicine, Internal Medicine, Surgery, or Family
Practice and maintain current recognition in the following
curricula:

(1)  Advanced Cardiac Life Support (or equivalent)
(2)  Pediatric Advanced Life Support (or equivalent)
(3)  Current certification in Emergency Medicine may be

held in lieu of III, B, 2, a, 1 – 2.
3.  Direct Supervision of Nursing and Medical Support Personnel

a)  A Registered Nurse qualified by training and experience in

emergency room nursing care shall be responsible for nursing
care within the ED at all times.

4.  Nursing

a)  All regularly scheduled nurses in the ED shall maintain
recognition in the following curricula:

(1)  Basic Life Support, Health Care Provider
(2)  Advanced Cardiac Life Support (or equivalent)
(3)  Pediatric Advanced Life Support (or equivalent)

b)  Nurses newly hired or assigned to the ED shall have current
recognition in the above curricula within 6 months of hire or
assignment.

5.  At least one person trained to operate all EMS communications

equipment shall be on duty at all times.

6.  Each facility shall designate a person or person(s) to represent the
hospital at EMS System Advisory Committee meetings, Trauma
System Audit Committee meetings, act as a liaison to the EMS
System, and disseminate information regarding EMS within the
facility.

C.  EMS Specific Training

1.  All regularly scheduled full time employees, to include physicians,
nurses, and support staff with patient care or ambulance interface
duties, shall complete training in the following areas:

a)  EMS Agency Policies
b)  EMS Agency Exception Reporting
c)  Diversion, EMS Agency and internal hospital policy

Page 2 of 9

Policy Reference No.: 5010
Effective Date: July 11, 2022

d)  Operation of all communication and diversion monitoring

equipment

e)  San Francisco Department of Public Health Emergency

Operations Plan
Internal disaster plans

f)

2.  All receiving hospitals will work cooperatively with the EMS Agency

and the Base Hospital to provide Continuing Education for prehospital
and ED personnel.

IV. SPECIFIC SERVICES AND EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS

A.  Data Collection and Sharing

1.  Record keeping

a)  The Emergency Department shall maintain a medical record

for each patient in accordance with Joint Commission
standards.

(1)  The record will include the Prehospital Care Report, if

applicable;

(2)  The records shall be immediately available to ED staff.

b)  The Emergency Department shall maintain a register that

includes all data elements defined by Joint Commission, Title
22, and will also include the name and unit number of the
transporting ambulance, when applicable.

2.  Hospitals will collect and report such information as determined
necessary by the EMS Medical Director for the purposes of public
health surveillance and injury prevention activities.

3.  Hospitals shall comply with the data reporting components of the

EMS Agency Quality Improvement plan.

B.  Referrals and Resources

1.  In addition to the required referrals listed in State law, receiving

hospitals shall maintain names, addresses, and telephone numbers
for the following:

a)  Sexual assault victim referral
b)  Elder, dependent adult, or child abuse
c)  Battered intimate partner or spouse referral
d)  Detoxification unit
e)  Drug and Alcohol abuse counseling and support services
f)  Psychiatric services
g)  Hyperbaric chamber
h)  Physician referral
i)  Outpatient medical services
j)  Resources for the homeless
k)  Other city and county designated specialty care centers
l)  Regional poison control center

Page 3 of 9

Policy Reference No.: 5010
Effective Date: July 11, 2022

2.  All receiving hospitals shall maintain access to the current EMS

Agency Policy Manual in the Emergency Department.

3.  Contact information for the following shall be available in the ED:

a)  EMS Agency Duty Officer
b)  Department of Emergency Management Division of
Emergency Communications (DEC) supervisor

c)  Ambulance providers supervisor and/or communications

center

d)  Department of Public Health Emergency Preparedness and

Response (PHEPR)

4.  All hospitals shall have transfer agreements with EMSA designated

specialty receiving centers (if such services are not available
internally) including, but not limited to the following facilities:

a)  Trauma Center
b)  Pediatric Critical Care Center
c)  Burn Center
d)  Stroke Center
e)  STAR Center

C.  Pediatric Services

1.  All receiving hospitals shall have the capability to resuscitate and

provide immediate, short-term post resuscitation care for pediatric
patients (< 14 years of age) in the Emergency Department.

2.  Appropriately sized and specialized equipment and pharmacological
agents necessary to resuscitate and care for pediatric patients in
accordance with current recommendations by the National
Emergency Medical Services for Children Resource Alliance shall be
immediately available in the Emergency Department.

V.  STANDARDS COMPLIANCE

A.  Each receiving hospital will complete a self-assessment at least once every 3

years to ensure compliance with EMS Agency requirements.

1.  The self assessment may be performed concurrent with Joint

Commission review.

2.  Results of the self-assessment must be sent to the EMS Agency.

B.  Receiving hospitals shall permit announced and unannounced visits by EMS

Agency staff for the purposes of monitoring compliance.

C.  Suspension/Revocation

1.  The EMS Medical Director may suspend or revoke approval of any

given receiving hospital for cause.

2.  The EMS Agency shall notify the hospital administration in writing of
its intent to deny, revoke, or suspend approval and give the hospital
sixty (60) days to submit a corrective action plan.

3.  The EMS Agency shall respond to the corrective action plan within

thirty (30) days.

Page 4 of 9

Policy Reference No.: 5010
Effective Date: July 11, 2022

a)  If the EMS Agency requests any modifications to the

Corrective Action Plan, the hospital shall have thirty (30) days
to respond to those requests.

4.  The EMS Agency will monitor the hospital’s compliance with the

Corrective Action Plan and take action as indicated.

5.  If, in the opinion of the EMS Medical Director, non-compliance or
failures on the part of a hospital constitute an immediate and
substantial hazard to the health, safety, or welfare of the public, the
EMS Agency may immediately suspend approval of that hospital.
a)  The hospital may appeal such a decision to the Director of

Public Health.

b)  The EMS Agency may continue a suspension pursuant to this

section until the noted deficiencies are corrected.

VI. PATIENT OFFLOAD DELAY MITIGATION

1.  For Receiving Facilities meeting Quality Assurance criteria of Policy
4000.1, Section IX, the Receiving Facility shall select a corrective
option listed below and submit selection in writing to the EMS Agency
within 30 days of issuance of the Hospital Report.

2.  Option 1 – Traditional Pathway: Receiving Facility acknowledges that
changes can be made by the Receiving Facility AND will eventually
meet the APOT-1 standard, with 5% improvement month on month.

3.   Receiving Facility shall submit a corrective action plan to reduce
APOT-1 delays within 30 days of corrective option selection.

a.  The EMS Agency shall review the corrective action plan within

10 business days.

b.  The plan shall include, but not limited to, the following topics:

i.  Current data and patient trends
ii.  Patient surge measures implemented such as HICS
(Hospital Incident Command System), alternative
treatment spaces, emergency staffing

iii.  Identification of communication pathways and plans
iv.  Objectives, measurements, and metrics for

improvement

c.  Upon approval of the plan by the EMS Agency, the Receiving
Facility shall have a minimum of 30 days to reduce APOT-1
times below 90th percentile of 30 minutes.

d.  This section (VI, 3(d) i-iii) is RESERVED until January 1, 2023.
Upon subsequent release of the monthly Hospital Report,
allowing a minimum of 30 days for corrective actions for mid-
month submission, hospitals with continued APOT-1 times
greater than 30 minutes shall be subject to the following
adverse actions. A Receiving Facility may choose one of the
following, in consultation with EMSA:

Page 5 of 9

Policy Reference No.: 5010
Effective Date: July 11, 2022

i.  Mandatory implementation of an EMS offload plan
that allows EMS providers to directly place a stable,
noncritical patient into a waiting room to ensure a 30-
minute offload time based on criteria for an APOT Alert
in Policy 4000.1.

1.  The temporary implementation will last for 30

calendar days.

ii.  Temporary suspension of the hospital’s prehospital
specialty care designation pursuant to Policy 5000 if
the specialty care destination has three (3) or more
receiving centers in San Francisco (ie STAR, stroke).
1.  The temporary suspension will last for 14

calendar days

iii.  The Receiving Facility may choose to cancel a

percentage of nonemergent, patient choice, elective
surgeries as an adverse action in lieu of two adverse
action options above. If the Receiving Facility chose
this adverse action, the Receiving Facility would notify
EMSA. EMSA would consider this decision a substantial
step in lieu of some of the other adverse actions.

e.  Any actions taken against a Receiving Facility shall be posted
to the EMS Agency website, including notice of any Receiving
Facilities on a Corrective Action Plan.
If a Receiving Facility does not make progress after
implementation of one of the above adverse actions, the
Receiving Facility may be subject to additional adverse
actions.

f.

4.  Option 2 – Root Cause Analysis and Adjudication: Receiving Facility
acknowledges that all changes that can be implemented have been
implemented, resources have been exhausted, and external factors
do not allow the Receiving Facility to meet the APOT-1 standard.
5.  Receiving Facility submit a corrective action plan to reduce APOT-1

delays within 30 days of corrective option selection.

a.  The EMS Agency shall review the corrective action plan within

10 business days.

b.  The plan shall include, but not limited to, the following topics:

i.  Prominent dashboards on homepage of public facing

Receiving Facility websites

ii.  Data submission and analysis as determined by the

EMS Agency

iii.  Quarterly reports to the San Francisco Health

Commission and Board of Supervisors (San Francisco
Controllers Office, if applicable or determined by EMS
Agency)

Page 6 of 9

c.  Upon approval of the plan by the EMS Agency, the Receiving
Facility shall comply with the plan or may be subject to
adverse actions as listed in Section VI, 3(d)(i-iii).

Policy Reference No.: 5010
Effective Date: July 11, 2022

VII. DIVERSION MITIGATION

1.  For Receiving Facilities meeting Quality Assurance criteria of Policy
5020, Section X,C, the Receiving Facility shall select a corrective
option listed below and submit selection in writing to the EMS Agency
within 30 days of issuance of the Hospital Report.

2.  Option 1 – Traditional Pathway: Receiving Facility acknowledges that
changes can be made by the Receiving Facility AND will eventually
meet the diversion standard, with 5% improvement month on month.

3.  Receiving Facility shall submit a corrective action plan to reduce

ambulance diversion within 30 days of corrective option selection.

a.  The EMS Agency shall review the corrective action plan within

10 business days.

b.  The plan shall include, but not limited to, the following topics:

i.  Current data and patient trends
ii.  Patient surge measures implemented such as HICS,
alternative treatment spaces, emergency staffing
iii.  Identification of communication pathways and plans
iv.  Objectives, measurements, and metrics for

improvement

c.  Upon approval of the plan by the EMS Agency, the Receiving

Facility shall have a minimum of 30 days to reduce ambulance
diversion monthly percentage times below 30%.

d.  Upon subsequent release of the monthly Hospital Report,

allowing a minimum of 30 days for corrective actions for mid-
month submission, hospitals with continued >30% ambulance
diversion shall be subject to the following adverse actions. A
Receiving Facility may choose one of the following, in
consultation with EMSA:

i.  Temporary allocation of a maximum of eight (8) hours
of ambulance diversion in a 24-hour period (midnight
to midnight), including the use of Trauma Override, if
applicable.

1.  The temporary implementation will last for 30

calendar days.

ii.  Temporary suspension of the hospital’s prehospital
specialty care designation pursuant to Policy 5000 if
the specialty care destination has three (3) or more
receiving centers in San Francisco (ie STAR, stroke).
1.  The temporary suspension will last for 14

calendar days.

Page 7 of 9

Policy Reference No.: 5010
Effective Date: July 11, 2022

iii.  The Receiving Facility may choose to cancel a

percentage of nonemergent, patient choice, elective
surgeries as an adverse action in lieu of two adverse
action options above. If the Receiving Facility chose
this adverse action, the Receiving Facility would notify
EMSA. EMSA would consider this decision a substantial
step in lieu of some of the other adverse actions.

e.  Any actions taken against a Receiving Facility shall be posted
to the EMS Agency website, including notice of any Receiving
Facilities on a Corrective Action Plan.
If a Receiving Facility does not make progress after
implementation of one of the above adverse actions, the
Receiving Facility may be subject to additional adverse
actions.

f.

4.  Option 2 – Root Cause Analysis and Adjudication: Receiving Facility
acknowledges that all changes that can be implemented have been
implemented, resources have been exhausted, and external factors
do not allow the Receiving Facility to meet the diversion standard.
5.  Receiving Facility submit a corrective action plan to reduce diversion

within 30 days of corrective option selection.

a.  The EMS Agency shall review the corrective action plan within

10 business days.

b.  The plan shall include, but not limited to, the following topics:

i.  Prominent dashboards on homepage of public facing

Receiving Facility websites

ii.  Data submission and analysis as determined by the

EMS Agency

iii.  Quarterly reports to the San Francisco Health

Commission and Board of Supervisors (San Francisco
Controllers Office, if applicable or determined by EMS
Agency)

c.  Upon approval of the plan by the EMS Agency, the Receiving
Facility shall comply with the plan or may be subject to
adverse actions as listed in Section VII, 3(d)(i-iii).

VIII.

EXCEPTIONS AND IMPLEMENTATION

1.  Sections VI and VII are considered a pilot policy and will undergo
formal outcomes review in June 2023, with formal reporting of
outcomes at July 2023 EMSAC to determine if this will be adopted
into full policy. If an outcomes review does not occur or obtain
consensus for any changes, sections VI and VII shall become
adopted in full.

Page 8 of 9

Policy Reference No.: 5010
Effective Date: July 11, 2022

2.  For Receiving Facilities that meet criteria as listed in Section VI(1)

and/or VII(1) AND are required to submit a correction action plan, the
following is in effect from July 1, 2022 until January 1, 2023.

a.  If Receiving Facility, in which is out of compliance, reduces

APOT 90th Percentile metric by 5% over previous month, the
corrective action plan requirement and adverse action process
is stayed.

b.  If Receiving Facility, reduces monthly ambulance diversion by

5% over previous month, the corrective action plan
requirement and adverse action process is stayed.

c.  The EMS Agency shall take into consideration external factors
that affect the entire San Francisco healthcare system in
corrective action plan requirements over a monthly period
such as a pandemic surge or increased levels of EMS patients.

d.  Upon completion of the listed implementation period, the

above section VIII is removed from EMSA policy.

Page 9 of 9

