SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

Policy Reference No.: 5013

Effective Date: February 1, 2004
Review Date: January 1, 2011
Supersedes:  New

TRAUMA CENTER DESIGNATION

I.  PURPOSE

To establish the process and criteria by which the EMS Agency designates a
Trauma Center(s) in the City and County of San Francisco

II.  AUTHORITY

A.  Division 2.5, California Health and Safety Code, Sections 1797.198,
1798.160, 1798.162 (a), 1798.163, 1798.165
B.  California Code of Regulations, Sections 100255, 100257, 100259, 100260,
100265
C.  City and County of San Francisco (CCSF) 2001 Trauma Care System Plan,
Section IX
D.  Resources for the Optimal Care of the Injured Patient published by the
American College of Surgeons Committee on Trauma (ACSCOT)

III. POLICY

A.  The EMS Agency Medical Director shall designate a Trauma Center(s) based
on the needs assessment, trauma care system design and standards set forth in the
CCSF Trauma Care System Plan.
B.  Initial designation for a trauma center may be conducted through a
competitive procurement/selection process in accordance with all applicable local,
state and federal laws and regulations.
C.  Designated Trauma Centers shall

1.  Maintain verification of Trauma Care services through the Trauma
Center verification program of the ACSCOT
2.  Execute a written agreement for provision of trauma care services with
the EMS Agency
3.  Participate in the EMS Agency trauma data collection system
4.  Participate in the EMS Agency trauma performance improvement
program
5.  Comply with all applicable EMS Agency policies and procedures

D.  The EMS Agency Medical Director shall evaluate designated Trauma
Centers’ status every three years, in consultation with the ACSCOT.
E.  In the event a designated Trauma Center fails to meet EMS Agency Trauma
Center criteria and standards as set forth in this policy

1.  The EMS Agency Medical Director may elect to issue a conditional
designation that will be followed within six to twelve months by another
evaluation of the deficient area(s).

Page 1

Policy Reference No.: 5013
Effective Date: February 1, 2004

2.  Upon satisfactory completion of a second evaluation, the EMS
Medical Director will restore the hospital’s status as a designated Trauma
Center.
3.  If the second evaluation is unsatisfactory, the EMS Agency Medical
Director, in consultation with the Director of Health, may elect to either
continue the conditional designation upon correction of the areas of
deficiency or solicit a Request for Proposals from other hospitals within
the City and County of San Francisco.

Page 2

