SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

Policy Reference No.: 5014
Effective Date: September 1, 2005
Review Date: January 1, 2011
Supersedes:  New

LEVEL I TRAUMA CARE STANDARDS

I.  Purpose

To define standards for Level I Trauma Care facilities.  Level I Trauma Care
Standards are adapted from California Code of Regulations Title 22 Trauma Care
System Standards (§100236 – 100266).

II.  Authority

A.  California Health and Safety Code 1797.198, 1797.204, 1797.224, 1798.160 –

165.

B.  CCR Title 22 100236 – 100266.

III. Trauma Center Requirements: Level I Trauma Centers

a.   A Level I or II trauma center is a licensed hospital which has been designated
as a Level I or II trauma center by the EMS Agency. While both Level I and II
trauma centers are similar, a Level I trauma center is required to have staff
and resources not required of a Level II trauma center. The additional Level I
requirements are located in Section III of these standards. Level I and II
trauma centers shall have appropriate pediatric equipment and supplies and be
capable of initial evaluation and treatment of pediatric trauma patients.
Trauma centers without a pediatric intensive care unit, as outlined in Section
III.e.1. of these standards, shall establish and utilize written criteria for
consultation and transfer of pediatric patients needing intensive care. A Level
I or Level II trauma center shall have at least the following:

1.  A trauma program medical director who is a board-certified surgeon,
whose responsibilities include, but are not limited to, factors that
affect all aspects of trauma care such as:

a)  recommending trauma team physician privileges;
b)  working with nursing and administration to support the needs

of trauma patients;

c)  developing trauma treatment protocols;
d)  determining appropriate equipment and supplies for trauma

care;

e)  ensuring the development of policies and procedures to manage

domestic violence, elder and child abuse and neglect;

f)  having authority and accountability for the quality

improvement peer review process;

g)  correcting deficiencies in trauma care or excluding from

trauma call those trauma team members who no longer meet
standards;

Page 1

Policy Reference No.: 5014
Effective Date: September 1, 2005

h)  coordinating pediatric trauma care with other hospital and

professional services;

i)  coordinating with local and State EMS agencies;
j)  assisting in the coordination of the budgetary process for the

trauma program; and

k)  identifying representatives from neurosurgery, orthopaedic

surgery, emergency medicine, pediatrics, and other appropriate
disciplines to assist in identifying physicians from their
disciplines who are qualified to be members of the trauma
program.

2.  A trauma nurse coordinator/manager who is a registered nurse with
qualifications including evidence of educational preparation and
clinical experience in the care of the adult and/or pediatric trauma
patient, administrative ability, and responsibilities that include, but
are not limited to:

a)  organizing services and systems necessary for the multi-
disciplinary approach to the care of the injured patient;
b)  coordinating day-to-day clinical process and performance

improvement as it pertains to nursing and ancillary personnel;
and

c)  collaborating with the trauma program medical director in

carrying out the educational, clinical, research, administrative,
and outreach activities of the trauma program.

3.  A trauma service which can provide for the implementation of the

requirements specified in these standards and provide for
coordination with the EMS Agency.

4.  A trauma team, which is a multi-disciplinary team responsible for
the initial resuscitation and management of the trauma patient.
5.  Department(s), division(s), service(s) or section(s) that include, at

least the following surgical specialties, which are staffed by qualified
specialists:

a)  general;
b)  neurologic;
c)  obstetric/gynecologic;
d)  ophthalmologic;
e)  oral or maxillofacial or head and neck;
f)  orthopaedic;
g)  plastic; and
h)  urologic

6.  Department(s), division(s), service(s) or section(s) that include, at
least the following non-surgical specialties, which are staffed by
qualified specialists:
a)  anesthesiology;
b)  internal medicine;
c)  pathology;

Page 2

Policy Reference No.: 5014
Effective Date: September 1, 2005

d)  psychiatry; and
e)  radiology;

7.  An emergency department, division, service or section staffed with
qualified specialists in emergency medicine who are immediately
available.

8.  Qualified surgical specialist(s) or specialty availability, which shall

be available as follows:

a)  general surgeon capable of evaluating and treating adult and
pediatric trauma patients shall be immediately available for
trauma team activation and promptly available for consultation;

b)  On-call and promptly available:

i.  neurologic;
ii.  obstetric/gynecologic;
iii.  ophthalmologic;
iv.  oral or maxillofacial or head and neck;
v.  orthopaedic;
vi.  plastic;
vii.  reimplantation/microsurgery capability. This

surgical service may be provided through a
written transfer agreement; and

viii.  urologic.

c)  Requirements may be fulfilled by supervised senior residents
as defined in EMS Agency Policy #1020, Glossary, who are
capable of assessing emergent situations in their respective
specialties. When a senior resident is the responsible surgeon:
i.  the senior resident shall be able to provide the

overall control and surgical leadership necessary
for the care of the patient, including initiating
surgical care;

ii.  a staff trauma surgeon or a staff surgeon with
experience in trauma care shall be on-call and
promptly available;

iii.  a staff trauma surgeon or a staff surgeon with

experience in trauma care shall be advised of all
trauma patient admissions, participate in major
therapeutic decisions, and be present in the
emergency department for major resuscitations
and in the operating room for all trauma
operative procedures.
d)  Available for consultation or consultation and transfer

agreements for adult and pediatric trauma patients requiring the
following surgical services;

i. burns;
ii. cardiothoracic;
iii.  pediatric;

Page 3

Policy Reference No.: 5014
Effective Date: September 1, 2005

iv. reimplantation/microsurgery; and
v. spinal cord injury.

9.  Qualified non-surgical specialist(s) or specialty availability, which

shall be available as follows:

a)  Emergency medicine, in-house and immediately available at all
times. This requirement may be fulfilled by supervised senior
residents, as defined in EMS Agency Policy #1020, Glossary,
in emergency medicine, who are assigned to the emergency
department and are serving in the same capacity. In such cases,
the senior resident(s) shall be capable of assessing emergency
situations in trauma patients and of providing for initial
resuscitation. Emergency medicine physicians who are
qualified specialists in emergency medicine and are board
certified in emergency medicine shall not be required by the
EMS Agency to complete an advanced trauma life support
(ATLS) course. Current ATLS verification is required for all
emergency medicine physicians who provide emergency
trauma care and are qualified specialists in a specialty other
than emergency medicine.

b)  Anesthesiology. Level II shall be promptly available with a

mechanism established to ensure that the anesthesiologist is in
the operating room when the patient arrives. This requirement
may be fulfilled by senior residents or certified registered nurse
anesthetists who are capable of assessing emergent situations in
trauma patients and of providing any indicated treatment and
are supervised by the staff anesthesiologist. In such cases, the
staff anesthesiologist on-call shall be advised about the patient,
be promptly available at all times, and be present for all
operations.

c)  Radiology, promptly available; and
d)  Available for consultation:

i.  cardiology;
ii.  gastroenterology;
iii.  hematology;
iv.  infectious diseases;
v.  internal medicine:
vi.  nephrology;
vii.  neurology;
viii.  pathology; and

ix.  pulmonary medicine.
b.  In addition to licensure requirements, trauma centers shall have the following

service capabilities:

1.  Radiological service. The radiological service shall have

immediately available a radiological technician capable of
performing plain film and computed tomography imaging. A

Page 4

Policy Reference No.: 5014
Effective Date: September 1, 2005

radiological service shall have the following additional services
promptly available:

a)  angiography; and
b)  ultrasound.

2.  Clinical laboratory service. A clinical laboratory service shall have:
a)  a comprehensive blood bank or access to a community central

blood bank; and

b)  clinical laboratory services immediately available.

3.  Surgical service. A surgical service shall have an operating suite that

is available or being utilized for trauma patients and that has:

a)  Operating staff who are promptly available unless operating on
trauma patients and back-up personnel who are promptly
available; and

b)  appropriate surgical equipment and supplies as determined by

the trauma program medical director.

c.  A Level I and II trauma center shall have a basic or comprehensive emergency
service which has special permits issued pursuant to Chapter 1, Division 5 of
Title 22. The emergency service shall:

1.  designate an emergency physician to be a member of the trauma

team;

2.  provide emergency medical services to adult and pediatric patients; and
3.  have appropriate adult and pediatric equipment and supplies as

approved by the director of emergency medicine in collaboration
with the trauma program medical director.

d.  In addition to the special permit licensing services, a trauma center shall have,

pursuant to Section 70301 of Chapter 1, Division 5 of Title 22 of the
California Code of Regulations, the following approved supplemental
services:

1.  Intensive Care Service:

a)  the ICU shall have appropriate equipment and supplies as

determined by the physician responsible for the intensive care
service and the trauma program medical director;

b)  The ICU shall have a qualified specialist promptly available to
care for trauma patients in the intensive care unit. The qualified
specialist may be a resident with two (2) years of training who
is supervised by the staff intensivist or attending surgeon who
participates in all critical decision making; and

c)  the qualified specialist in b) above shall be a member of the

trauma team.

2.  Burn Center. This service may be provided through a written transfer

agreement with a Burn Center.

3.  Physical Therapy Service. Physical therapy services to include

personnel trained in physical therapy and equipped for acute care of
the critically injured patient.

Page 5

Policy Reference No.: 5014
Effective Date: September 1, 2005

4.  Rehabilitation Center. Rehabilitation services to include personnel
trained in rehabilitation care and equipped for acute care of the
critically injured patient. These services may be provided through a
written transfer agreement with a rehabilitation center.

5.  Respiratory Care Service. Respiratory care services to include

personnel trained in respiratory therapy and equipped for acute care
of the critically injured patient.
6.  Acute hemodialysis capability.
7.  Occupational therapy service. Occupational therapy services to

include personnel trained in occupational therapy and equipped for
acute care of the critically injured patient.

8.  Speech therapy service. Speech therapy services to include personnel
trained in speech therapy and equipped for acute care of the critically
injured patient.
9.  Social Service.

e.  A trauma center shall have the following services or programs that do not

require a license or special permit.

1.  Pediatric Service. In addition to the requirements in Division 5 of

Title 22 of the California Code of Regulations, the pediatric service
providing in-house pediatric trauma care shall have:

a)  a pediatric intensive care unit approved by the California State
Department of Health Services’ California Children Services
(CCS); or a written transfer agreement with an approved
pediatric intensive care unit. Hospitals without pediatric
intensive care units shall establish and utilize written criteria
for consultation and transfer of pediatric patients needing
intensive care; and

b)  a multidisciplinary team to manage child abuse and neglect.
2.  Acute spinal cord injury management capability. This service may

be provided through a written transfer agreement with a
Rehabilitation Center;

3.  Protocol to identify potential organ donors as described in Division 7,

Chapter 3.5 of the California Health and Safety Code;

4.  An outreach program, to include:

a)  capability to provide both telephone and on-site consultations
with physicians in the community and outlying areas; and

b)  trauma prevention for the general public;

5.  Written interfacility transfer agreements with referring and specialty

hospitals;

6.  Continuing education. Continuing education in trauma care shall be

provided for:

a)  staff physicians;
b)  staff nurses;
c)  staff allied health personnel;
d)  EMS personnel; and

Page 6

Policy Reference No.: 5014
Effective Date: September 1, 2005

e)  other community physicians and health care personnel.

IV. Additional Level I Criteria

In addition to the above requirements, a Level I trauma center shall have:

a.   One of the following patient volumes annually:
            1.   a minimum of 1200 trauma program hospital admissions, or
            2.   a minimum of 240 trauma patients per year whose Injury Severity
                  Score (ISS) is greater than 15, or

3.  an average of 35 trauma patients (with an ISS score greater than 15)

per trauma program surgeon per year.

b.   Additional qualified surgical specialists or specialty availability on-call and
      promptly available:

1.   cardiothoracic; and
2.  pediatrics;

c.   A surgical service that has at least the following:

1.   operating staff who are immediately available unless operating on
      trauma patients and back-up personnel who are promptly available.
2.  cardiopulmonary bypass equipment; and
3.   operating microscope.

d.   Anesthesiology immediately available. This requirement may be fulfilled by
      senior residents or certified registered nurse anesthetists who are capable of
      assessing emergent situations in trauma patients and of providing treatment
      and are supervised by the staff anesthesiologist.
e.  An intensive care unit with a qualified specialist in-house and immediately
available to care for trauma patients in the intensive care unit. The qualified
specialist may be a resident with 2 years of training who is supervised by the
staff intensivist or attending surgeon who participates in all critical decision
making.

f.  A Trauma research program; and
g.  An ACGME approved surgical residency program.

Page 7

Policy Reference No.: 5014
Effective Date: September 1, 2005

V.   Quality Improvement

Trauma centers of all levels shall have a quality improvement process to include
structure, process, and outcome evaluations which focus on improvement efforts to
identify root causes of problems, intervene to reduce or eliminate these causes, and take
steps to correct the process. In addition, the process shall include:

a.  A detailed audit of all trauma-related deaths, major complications and

transfers (including interfacility transfer);

b.  A multi-disciplinary trauma peer review committee that includes all members

of the trauma team;

c.  Participation in the trauma system data management system;
d.  Participation in the EMS Agency Trauma System Audit Committee; and
e.  Each trauma center shall have a written system in place for patients, parents of

minor children who are patients, legal guardian(s) of children who are
patients, and/or primary caretaker(s) of children who are patients to provide
input and feedback to hospital staff regarding the care provided to the child.

f.  Following of applicable provisions of Evidence Code Section 1157.7 to

ensure confidentiality.

Page 8

