SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

Policy Reference No.:  5015
Effective Date: October 1, 2022
Supersedes: August 1, 2007

I.

PURPOSE

STROKE CENTER STANDARDS

Establish the minimum standards for Receiving Hospitals who wish to accept acute stroke
patients from approved ALS and BLS providers within the San Francisco EMS System.

II.

POLICY

A.  Stroke Centers shall be Receiving Hospitals as defined by San Francisco (SF) Emergency
Medical Services (EMS) Agency Policy and will comply with all Federal, State, and local
laws as well as all EMS Agency Policies.

1.  Joint Commission accredited Stroke Centers (Primary, Thrombectomy-Capable or

Comprehensive) are considered to have met the specialty equipment and
personnel requirements of this policy. Hospitals approved under this provision
will have transfer agreements with other Receiving Hospitals for stroke patients
and will participate the EMS Agency Policy 6010 – Quality Improvement Program
guidelines, including the submission of required QI data.

B.  Stroke Centers shall provide a Stroke Advisory Committee Member and Alternate
Member and participate in committee meeting per Policy 1010 – EMS Advisory
Committees.

C.  Stroke Centers shall maintain a current Memorandum of Understanding with the EMS

Agency.

D.  Application Process

1.  A Receiving Hospital that wishes to become a Stroke Center must submit a

request in writing no later than 60 days prior to the desired date of designation
as a Stroke Center by the EMS Agency.

2.  The request must include the date of achievement of a Joint Commission

accreditation as a Stroke Center and the name and contact information for the
Stroke Center Program Manager.

3.  The request must be signed by the Program Manager and the hospital Chief

Executive or Chief Operations Officer.

4.  Currently designated Stroke Centers must maintain their MOU’s with the EMS

Agency.

E.  Approval

1.  New Stroke Centers will be approved after satisfactory review of application

documentation and a sire survey, when deemed necessary, by the EMS Agency
Medical Director or his/her designee.

2.  The Stroke Center will be re-approved after satisfactory San Francisco EMS

Agency review every three (3) years.

3.  The Stroke Center Program Manager shall notify the EMS Agency of subsequent

changes in their status.

Page 1

Policy Reference No.:  5015
Effective Date: October 1, 2022

III.

AUTHORITY

A. California Health and Safety Code, Sections 1255, 1255.5, 1256, 1797.220, 1797.222,

1798, 1798.150, 1798.163, 1799.202 et seq.

B. California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Sections 100270.223-100270.227
C. Joint Committee on the Accreditation of Hospitals and Health Care Organizations (Joint

Commission) Primary Stroke Center

Page 2

