SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

Policy Reference No: 5016
Effective Date: October 1, 2022
Supersedes: January 7, 2013

STEMI AND ROSC (“STAR”) RECEIVING CENTER STANDARDS

I.  PURPOSE

To establish standards for the designation of hospitals as approved receiving centers for
STEMI and post-cardiac arrest patients with Return of Spontaneous Circulation (ROSC)
called STAR Centers.

II.  DEFINITIONS

STEMI: An acute myocardial infarction that generates a ST segment elevation on a 12-
lead electrocardiogram (EKG).

ST Elevation Myocardial Infarction / Post Arrest with ROSC (STAR) Center: A licensed
general acute care hospital with a special permit for a cardiac catheterization laboratory
and cardiovascular surgery from the California State Department of Health Services and
designated as a STAR center by the County of San Francisco.

Return of Spontaneous Circulation (ROSC) Post-cardiac arrest patients are those with a
pulse, blood pressure or have cardiac output directly observed with ultrasound. These
patients are eligible for ICU care and specialized treatment, such as therapeutic
hypothermia and cardiac catheterization (if found to have a STEMI as the cause of the
cardiac arrest).

III.  POLICY

A.  The EMS Medical Director shall designate a STAR Receiving Center based on the

standards set forth in policy.

B.  Designated STAR Receiving Centers shall agree to comply with all applicable EMS

Agency Policies and procedures.

C.  A hospital must demonstrate all of the following to become a designated STAR

Receiving Center for the EMS system:
1.  Written agreements with the San Francisco EMS Agency designating the hospital

as:
a)  An approved receiving destination for patients transported by EMS

ambulances.

b)  An approved destination for STEMI and post-cardiac arrest patients. STAR

receiving centers have two months after obtaining the initial designation to
complete this written agreement.

2.  Licensure as a Comprehensive or Basic Emergency Department (ED).

Policy Reference No.: 5016
Effective Date: October 1, 2022

3.  A special permit for a Cardiac Catheterization Laboratory from the California

State Department of Health Services (DHS) as well as a special permit issued by
DHS for Cardiovascular Surgery Service.

4.  Accreditation by the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Health Care

Organizations.

5.  STAR program description that includes an organizational chart, programmatic
goals and objectives, and a Quality Assurance program for both STEMI and post-
cardiac arrest patients.

6.  Data reporting procedures for the data elements listed in Appendix A.
7.  Assigned Program coordinators:

a)  One interventional cardiologist.
b)  One nursing administrator (selected from Interventional Cardiology or

Emergency Department or Intensive Care Unit).

c)  Both program coordinators must actively participate in meetings of a STAR
Committee which reports to the EMS Advisory Committee (EMSAC).

8.  A single point of contact responsible for reporting the data elements listed in

Appendix A to the EMS Agency. (This point of contact may be from a service line
or department responsible for quality and/or administration of patients treated
by Interventional Cardiology, ED or ICU, and does not need to be either a
physician or a nurse administrator).

IV. INITIAL APPLICATION FOR STAR DESIGNATION

A.  Interested hospitals shall submit a written request for STAR receiving center status

along with documentation of their eligibility for the STAR Receiving Center
designation by compliance with standards listed in Section IV.

B.  STAR Receiving Centers must pay all applicable fees at a time designated by the EMS
Agency. The San Francisco Business and Tax Regulations Code SEC. 249.8 (e)(1-2)
authorizes the payment of regulatory fees to the City and County of San Francisco
for hospitals that receive STEMI patients through EMS ambulance services.

C.  Approval or denial of the STAR receiving center designation shall be made in writing
by the EMS Agency to the requesting Hospital within one month after receipt of the
request and all required documentation.

D.  The EMS Agency reserves the right to do an initial site survey to assure compliance

with the standards listed in this policy.

V.   MAINTENANCE OF STAR DESIGNATION

A.  Each receiving hospital will complete a self-assessment at least once every two years
to ensure compliance with EMS Agency requirements. The self assessment may be
performed concurrent with JCAHO review.

B.  A STAR Receiving Center shall comply with the data collection, record keeping and
quality improvement standards. Data requirements may be revised periodically by

Policy Reference No.: 5016
Effective Date: October 1, 2022

the STAR Committee with recommendations made to the EMS Agency Medical
Director.

C.  A STAR Receiving Center shall participate in data collection registries, programs,

applications, and processes as specified by EMS Agency Medical Director.  Data shall
be submitted to meet all guidelines and deadlines.

D.  A STAR Receiving Center shall promote relevant SF EMS Agency, STAR Committee

programs to its staff and constituency.

E.  Regular participation of the STAR Program coordinators in the STAR Committee

meetings.

F.  STAR Receiving Centers must pay all applicable fees at a time designated by the EMS
Agency. The San Francisco Business and Tax Regulations Code SEC. 249.8 (e)(1-2)
authorizes the payment of regulatory fees to the City and County of San Francisco
for hospitals that receive STEMI patients through Ambulance Service Providers.
G.  The EMS Agency may deny, suspend, or revoke the approval of a STAR Receiving

Center for failure to comply with any applicable policies, procedures, or regulations.
Requests for review or appeal of such decisions shall be brought to the Medical
Director of the EMS Agency.  Second requests for review or appeal of the EMS
Agency Medical Director decision may be submitted to the San Francisco Director of
Health.

H.  The EMS Agency reserves the right to do periodic site surveys to assure compliance

with the standards listed in this policy.

VI. AUTHORITY

A.  Code of Federal Regulations, Title 45, Section 164.512 (b) (l) (i)
B.  California Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, Sections 1797.222, 1797.250,

1797.252, 1798, and 1798.150

C.  California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Sections 100169, 70411-70419, and 70451

– 70459

D.  Joint Commission on Accreditation of Health Care Organizations, Emergency

Department Standards

E.  San Francisco Business and Tax Regulations Code SEC. 249.8 (e)(1-2)

