SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

Policy Reference No.:  5020
Effective Date: October 1, 2023
Supersedes: July 11, 2023

I.

PURPOSE

DIVERSION POLICY

To establish procedures for hospitals to divert 911 ambulance patients.

II.

HOSPITAL STATUS DEFINTIONS

Open: A hospital can receive patients transported via 911 ambulances.

Ambulance Diversion: A hospital is temporarily closed to select patients transported via
911 ambulances due to an overload of patients in the Emergency Department.

Internal Disaster: A hospital is completely closed to ALL patients transported via 911
ambulances due to a compromised specialty center function or when an internal
disaster status with the Hospital Incident Command System (HICS) is activated.

Diversion Suspension: A temporary halt to the use of ambulance diversion.

III.

POLICY

A.  ReddiNet is an internet-based communications system that is used to communicate a
hospital’s diversion status to the EMS System (911 Dispatch [Division of Emergency
Communications (DEC)], hospitals and ambulances). Each EMS organization shall have
personnel trained to operate ReddiNet on-duty 24 hours a day, seven days a week.

B.  EMS personnel shall utilize Policy 5000 – Destination Policy to determine a hospital

destination for ambulance transported patients.  The Base Hospital Physician is the final
authority in determining a destination for a patient during an ambulance transport.

C.  Ambulance Divert / Diversion may only be declared by a hospital when its Emergency
Department has an overload of patients, and it cannot safely provide care to any
additional 911 ambulance patients.  A hospital may NOT declare Diversion due to the
lack of staff or in-patient medical/surgical or critical care beds.

D.  Ambulance Diversion ONLY applies to general medical patients. Diversion does NOT

apply to:
1.  Critical airway patients
2.  Adult critical medical patients,
3.  Patients meeting the following Specialty Care triage criteria (listed below except in

the instance of APOT or diversion mitigation measures are in effect):

a)  Pediatric Medical

Page 1

Policy Reference No.: 5020
Effective Date: October 1, 2023

b)  Pediatrics Critical Medical
c)  STAR (STEMI and/or Post Arrest with ROSC)
d)  Reimplantation (Microvascular Surgery)
e)  Burns
f)  Obstetrics
g)  Stroke
h)  Trauma
i)  LVAD
j)  Post-Sexual Assault

4.  Patients originating from a hospital-based clinic.  Such patients shall be considered
to have arrived on hospital property and must be transported to that hospital’s
Emergency Department.

5.  Patients who are incarcerated (e.g., inmate from county jail or to/from court
hearing) or in law enforcement custody, who are transported from county jail
booking/holding/parking areas, must be taken to Zuckerberg San Francisco General
Hospital (unless specialty is not available at ZSFG, e.g., burns). Diversion DOES apply
to patients who are under arrest or detained by law enforcement who have NOT
been transported to or located at a county jail.

E.  Internal Disaster is the declaration of a complete closure of the Emergency Department
to ALL 911 ambulance traffic due to a compromised specialty center function (e.g.,
cardiac catheterization lab is down and not available for a 911 ambulance patient) OR
when an internal disaster status with the Hospital Incident Command System (HICS) is
activated.
1.  A hospital may not declare an internal disaster due to the lack of staff or in-patient

medical/surgical or critical care beds or Emergency Department beds.

2.  The following physical plant issues must exist during a declared internal disaster

status:

a)  Compromised power supply,
b)  Fire,
c)  Flooding,
d)  Hazmat (contamination of patient care areas), or
e)  Safety and security compromised (e.g., imminent threat of violence or active

violent incident), and

f)  Hospital Incident Command System (HICS) is activated.

3.  A hospital declaring Internal Disaster is REQUIRED to notify the Department of
Emergency Management (DEM) Duty Officer. The DEM Duty Officer must be
contacted through the 911 Dispatch [DEC].

IV.

DIVERSON SUSPENSION

A.  Diversion Suspension is a temporary halt in the use of ambulance diversion. Diversion
suspension requires Receiving Hospitals to accept all 911 ambulance transported

Page 2

Policy Reference No.: 5020
Effective Date: October 1, 2023

patients.  The intent of Diversion Suspension is to “open up” hospitals that are on
diversion to allow for the safe and efficient function of the EMS system.

B.  Diversion suspension is initiated by automatically via ReddiNet when four (4) or more of

the following full Receiving Hospitals* are on Diversion:

1.  San Francisco General Hospital
2.  CPMC-Mission Bernal
3.  UCSF – Parnassus
4.  St Mary’s Medical Center
5.  Kaiser San Francisco
6.  CPMC – Van Ness
7.  CMPC – Davies Campus
8.  St Francis Memorial Hospital
9.  Chinese Hospital

*”Full Receiving Hospitals” receive both critical (Code 3 lights and sirens) and
non-urgent (Code 2 non-lights and sirens) 911 ambulance traffic.

C.  When diversion suspension is initiated, it shall remain in effect for a four-hour time

period.

D.  Diversion suspension does NOT apply to:

1.  The pediatric Emergency Departments at UCSF Mission Bay, or CPMC – Van Ness.
2.  Hospitals located in other counties (Seton Medical Center and Kaiser South San

Francisco in San Mateo County).

3.  When a hospital is on “INTERNAL DISASTER the hospital remains completely closed

to all 911 ambulance traffic even during a diversion suspension.

V.

ZUCKERBERG TRAUMA OVERRIDE

A.  ZSFG is the only Trauma Center for San Francisco. During Diversion Suspension, ZSFG

may elect to invoke “Trauma Override” which continues the diversion of medical (non-
trauma) patients away from ZSFG.  The intent of Trauma Override is to preserve the
ZSFG Emergency Department capacity for trauma patients.

B.  Trauma Override does NOT apply to:

1.  Critical airway patients,
2.  Adult critical medical patients,
3.  Patients meeting Specialty Care criteria listed in III.D.
4.  Patients originating from a hospital-based clinic.  Such patients shall be considered

to have arrived on hospital property and shall be transported to the ZSFG Emergency
Department.

6.  Patients who are incarcerated (e.g., inmate from county jail or to/from court

hearing) or in police custody who are or transported from county jail
booking/holding/parking areas. Trauma Override DOES apply to patients who are

Page 3

Policy Reference No.: 5020
Effective Date: October 1, 2023

under arrest or detained by law enforcement who have NOT been transported to or
located at a county jail.

7.  ZSFG will follow Policy 5021 Trauma Center Bypass for any internal disaster situation

that closes it to trauma patients.

VI.

HOSPITAL PROCEDURES

A.  A hospital is considered OPEN for receiving 911 ambulance patients if the diversion

status is not displayed on the ReddiNet status screen.

B.  A hospital is on AMBULANCE DIVERT when the ReddiNet status page displays a red “ED”

next to the facility name.

C.  ZSFG is on TRAUMA OVERRIDE when “Trauma Override” appears in red next to facility

name on the the ReddiNet status page

D.  A specialty center designated receiving hospital or receiving hospital is on INTERNAL
DISASTER when a red “INT” appears next to the facility name on the ReddiNet status
page.

E.  Hospitals shall change their diversion status to OPEN on the ReddiNet screen

immediately upon relieving the situation that necessitated the use of any divert status.

VII.

AMBULANCE PROCEDURES

A.  When hospital is on “AMBULANCE DIVERT,” no general medical patients may be

transported to that hospital. Ambulance Diversion does NOT apply to:

1.  Critical airway patients
2.  Critical medical adult patients, or
3.  Patients meeting Specialty Care triage criteria.
4.  Patients originating from a hospital-based clinic.

B.  When a hospital is on “INTERNAL DISASTER,” NO patient will be transported via 911
ambulance to that hospital.  The hospital is completely closed to ALL 911 ambulance
traffic even during a diversion suspension.

C.  Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital is open to incarcerated (e.g. inmate from

county jail or to/from court hearing) or in-custody patients who are transported from
county jail booking/holding/parking area except when an “INTERNAL DISASTER and
TRAUMA BYPASS” are declared. If “INTERNAL DISASTER and TRAUMA BYPASS” are
declared, all in-custody patients are considered Adult Medical and can go to any facility
(unless specialty).

Page 4

Policy Reference No.: 5020
Effective Date: October 1, 2023

D.  Ambulances that are en route to any hospital or have arrived on hospital property must
complete the patient transport to that facility when its Emergency Department goes on
Diversion except when a “INTERNAL DISASTER is declared.

E.  Ambulances may go to a hospital during a declared INTERNAL DISASTER if they are

needed for the evacuation of patients in that facility.

VIII.  BACK UP TELEPHONE COMMUNICATIONS IF REDDINET FAILS

A.  Hospitals must notify DEC via telephone of any diversion status changes.

B.  DEC may enter the hospital status into ReddiNet if the hospital is unable to access the

web site on dedicated desktop or mobile device.

C.  All ReddiNet users (hospitals/911 dispatch) must contact their IT staff and / or the
ReddiNet Technical Support line for assistance in getting the website back up.

IX.

QUALITY ASSURANCE

A.  The EMS Agency shall report monthly diversion activity for all San Francisco Receiving

Hospitals (referred to as “Hospital Report”).

B.  Problems related to the implementation of this policy shall be reported to the EMS

Agency through the Exception and Sentinel Events Report System.

C.  Based on the Hospital Report, the EMS Agency may take action on a Receiving Facility,

as detailed in Policy 5010, who have a:

a.  Monthly diversion percentage less than 30%, but greater than 20%, the EMS

Agency will continue to monitor via quality improvement in subsequent months
b.  Monthly diversion percentage greater than 30% for two (2) consecutive months

i.  The EMS Agency shall refer to corrective action plan process as detailed

in Policy 5010

X.

AUTHORITY

California Health and Safety Code, Section 1798

Page 5

