I.

II.

III.

SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

Policy Reference No:  5021
Effective: February 1, 2009
   Review Date:  February 1, 2011
Supersedes:  August 1, 2008

TRAUMA CENTER BYPASS POLICY

PURPOSE
To describe Trauma Center bypass procedure for the optimal care of trauma patients if
San Francisco General Hospital (SFGH) Trauma services are not available.

AUTHORITY
▪

Division 2.5, California Health and Safety Code, Sections 1797.198, 1798.160,
1798.162 (a), 1798.163, 1798.165
California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9, Chapter 7: Trauma Care
Systems, Sections 100255 (a-c)
City and County of San Francisco Trauma Care System Plan, Section VII,
Objective III.A.

▪

▪

POLICY
▪

Conditions under which the Trauma Center Bypass Policy shall be activated:
1.

The Trauma Center Bypass policy shall be activated if the Trauma Center
is incapable of receiving trauma patients as defined in the Trauma Triage
Criteria # 5001.

▪

The Trauma Center will notify EMS Agency to activate either “partial” or
“total” bypass.

▪

▪

“Partial bypass” means that the Trauma Center can only receive
trauma patients approved for transport to SFGH by Base Hospital
MD (for example, CT scan is unavailable, but all other equipment
and services are functioning normally).

“Total bypass” means that the SFGH Trauma Center cannot receive
any trauma patients (for example, a disruption in building structural
integrity renders all the operating rooms non-functional).

▪

SFGH Policy Development
▪

By August 1, 2009 SFGH shall develop and implement an internal policy
and procedure to initiate the Trauma Center Bypass policy.
▪

The SFGH internal policy and procedure will include a mechanism
that is approved by the EMS Agency Medical Director for notifying
the EMS Agency Duty Officer and the Department of Emergency
Management, Division of Emergency Communication (DEC).

Page 1 of 7

SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

Policy Reference No:  5021
Effective: February 1, 2009
   Review Date:  February 1, 2011
Supersedes:  August 1, 2008

IV.

PROCEDURE
▪

Initiation of Trauma Center Bypass Policy
▪

Prior to initiation of the Trauma Center Bypass policy, the SFGH hospital
internal disaster plan shall be activated.

▪

▪

Notification of the EMS Agency Section Duty Officer
▪

SFGH Administrator on Duty (AOD) shall contact the EMS Duty Officer
to consider activation of the Trauma Center Bypass Policy.
▪

EMS Duty Officer pager # is 327-9114.

Activation of Trauma Center Bypass Policy
▪
The EMS Duty Officer shall verify that:
▪

SFGH Trauma Center has a partial or total incapacity to receive
trauma patients as defined in the Critical Trauma Patient Criteria
and Triage Decision Scheme Policy # 5001.

▪

▪

▪

SFGH has made every attempt to ensure that trauma services are
available and has initiated the hospital internal disaster plan.

The EMS Duty Officer, in consultation with the SFGH AOD shall
determine that the Trauma Center is on partial or total bypass, and shall
activate the Trauma Center Bypass Policy.

The EMS Duty Officer shall advise DEC and contact the San Mateo Public
Safety Communications at 650-363-4981 and request the EMS on call
Administrator and the AMR Field Supervisor be notified. Communication
shall include reference to the EMS Aircraft Utilization Policy # 4020 for
consideration of direct transport of the trauma patients by air from field to
regional trauma centers. The DEC shall notify regional Trauma Centers of
policy activation.

▪

DEC shall alert all hospital and pre-hospital providers of activation of the
Trauma Center Bypass Policy via:

▪
▪
▪
▪

SFFD EMS 800 MHz radio
Hospital roll call on 800 MHz radio
EMResource and
Private ambulance dispatch center

▪

▪

SFGH shall indicate the beginning and end of Trauma Center Bypass on
the EMResource screen.

During periods of activation of this policy, SFGH shall provide a Trauma
Center status update to the DEC and the EMS Duty Officer 2 hours after

Page 2 of 7

SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

Policy Reference No:  5021
Effective: February 1, 2009
   Review Date:  February 1, 2011
Supersedes:  August 1, 2008

activation, then on a regular 4-hour schedule until Trauma Center Bypass is
ended.

▪

▪

The EMS Agency Duty Officer may ask for a status update from SFGH at
any time during periods of policy activation.

When Trauma Center Bypass is no longer required, SFGH shall consult
with EMS Duty officer, who will verify and notify the DEC and San Mateo
Public Safety Communications.

▪

Destination
▪

While this policy is activated, patients who meet Trauma Triage Criteria
Policy # 5001 will be diverted from SFGH Trauma Center to local and
regional hospitals.  Whenever possible, transport will be by air.
Destination decision will be based on the following:

▪

During partial Trauma Center Bypass, Field providers will consult
with the Base Hospital Physician to determine if SFGH can take a
critical trauma patient.  If SFGH cannot receive the patient, the
patient will be transported to the most accessible regional trauma
center.
▪
 In cases of airway compromise, impending arrest, cardiac
resuscitation, or post resuscitation, patient will be transported to
the nearest Receiving Hospital, which may include SFGH.

▪

During total Trauma Center Bypass, the Trauma Triage Criteria
Policy #5001 will be utilized as follows:

▪  Patients meeting Mechanism-only trauma center transport
criteria shall be transported by ground ambulance to the nearest
open receiving hospital.

▪  Patients meeting Anatomical and/or Physiologic trauma center
transport criteria shall be transported by air or ground ambulance
to the most accessible regional Trauma Center. Pediatric patients
will be transported to Oakland Children’s Hospital.

▪  Air ambulances will transport to the most accessible regional
Level I or II Trauma Center with air access, in accordance with
EMS Aircraft Policy # 4020.

▪
In cases of airway compromise, impending arrest, cardiac
resuscitation, or post resuscitation, patient will be transported to
the nearest Receiving Hospital.

Page 3 of 7

SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

Policy Reference No:  5021
Effective: February 1, 2009
   Review Date:  February 1, 2011
Supersedes:  August 1, 2008

▪

▪

If transporting by ground to a regional trauma center, San Francisco
paramedics will notify the intended destination of their ETA and patient
status through the DEC.  DEC will use the standard “Field Report” form in
Attachment C and fax this to regional trauma center receiving the patient,
as well as to the EMS Agency.

During periods of activation of this policy, the Trauma Center will not
invoke “Trauma Center Override”.

▪

Quality Assurance
▪

Within 3 working days of any activation of the Trauma Center Bypass
Policy, SFGH Trauma Center will issue a report to the EMS Agency(see
Attachment A).

▪

▪

Activation of the Trauma Center Bypass Policy is a sentinel event and will
be reviewed by the San Francisco Trauma System Audit Committee.

Activation of the Trauma Center Bypass Policy is a standard reporting item
for Health Commission review.

Page 4 of 7

ATTACHMENT A
TRAUMA CENTER BYPASS POLICY
ACTIVATION REPORT

To be completed by the SFGH Trauma Center within 3 working days of an incident that results in activation
of the Trauma Center Bypass Policy.  Please fax to EMS Agency # 415-552-0194.

Please provide the following information:

Date and Time Bypass Activated:    Date__________
Date and Time Bypass Terminated: Date__________

Time: ____________
Time: ____________

What was the nature of the incident that prompted activation?  Please describe the circumstances
(example: what equipment/physical plant failure?)

How was the problem resolved?

▪  Did SFGH initiate internal disaster plan prior to Trauma Bypass activation? ___yes   ____no

▪  Was SFGH on Diversion at the time of the Trauma Bypass activation?

      ____yes    ____no

▪  Date and Time Diversion had been activated:

Date:______  Time: ________

▪  Was SFGH on Trauma Override at the time of Trauma Bypass activation?   ___yes    ____no

▪  Date and Time Trauma Override had been activated: Date:_______  Time:_________

Number of patients triaged to alternate destinations:

Name of Hospital__________________________________ Number of patients__________

Name of Hospital__________________________________ Number of patients__________

Your recommendations/comments about this policy: did the Trauma Bypass procedure work?  Did
the notification and triage procedures facilitate optimal patient care? Please include additional pages if needed.

Completed by:
Name: ______________________________________________________

phone#_____________

SFGH Title: ________________________________________________

date: _______________

                                                                                                                                  Page 5 of 7

ATTACHMENT B

REGIONAL TRAUMA CENTERS
Contact Information and Flight Time Intervals

TRAUMA CENTER

PHONE CONTACT

Highland Alameda County Hospital
Oakland Childrens (Level II
pediatric)
Eden Hospital (Level II)
(Castro Valley)
John Muir Hospital (Level II)
(Walnut Creek)

ED: 510-437-4559

ED: 510-428-3240

ED: 510-889-5015

ED: 925-939-5800

Stanford Health Care (Level I)

ED: 650-497-5803

San Jose Hospital (Level II)
Santa Clara Valley Medical Center
(San Jose) (Level I)

ED: 408-977-4684

ED: 408-885-6912

Santa Rosa Memorial (Level II)

ED: 707-525-5207

UC Davis (Level I adult & pediatric)

ED: 916-734-3790

FLIGHT TIME
INTERVAL
from central San
Francisco
NO HELIPAD; GROUND
TRANSPORT ONLY

5 min.

10 min.

10 min.

12 min.

20 min.

20 min.

25 min.

35 min.

                                                                                                                                  Page 6 of 7

ATTACHMENT C
FIELD REPORT FORM
To be used by DEC to report patient information to destination Trauma Centers.

Date____________  Time__________

Ambulance Unit_______________

DEC Call Taker________________________________   Run Number______________

Chief Complaint_________________________________ AMPDS code______________

PATIENT INFORMATION

AGE___________________________

SEX___________________________

MECHANISM OF
INJURY______________________________________________________________________

TYPE OF
INJURY/INJURIES_____________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________

VITAL SIGNS:

BLOOD PRESSURE__________ PULSE________       RESPIRATORY RATE____________

 c-spine

TREATMENT:
____________________________________ medications (if applicable)
_______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________
_______________________________________________________________________________

 intubated (nasal/oral)

 IV

DESTINATION TRAUMA CENTER_______________________________________________

ETA____________

Hospital Notification:

TIME: __________________HOSPITAL CALL TAKER: ______________________________

Please fax completed form to EMS Agency # 415-552-0194 and to Regional Trauma Centers.

                                                                                                                                  Page 7 of 7

