SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY

MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

EFFECTIVE DATE: 10/1/25

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 5030

SUPERSEDES: 8/1/08

INTERFACILITY TRANSFERS

1.  PURPOSE

1.1.  Define the San Francisco EMS Agency requirements pertaining to interfacility transfers by

ambulances

1.2.  Establish procedures to arrange, facilitate, and track interfacility transfers
1.3.  Identify appropriate level of care and method transport within the San Francisco EMS System

2.  POLICY

2.1.  Hospitals shall comply with all applicable Federal, State, and Local laws, regulations, and

policies governing the access, treatment, and transfer of patients.

2.2.  Hospitals shall develop written policies governing patient transfers and ensuring compliance

with all applicable laws, regulations, and policies.

2.3.  Hospitals shall have contingency plans in place to transfer patients without use of system 9-1-1

resources.

2.4.  Hospitals shall develop written transfer agreements with Receiving Facilities offering specialty

care services not readily available or on-site.
2.4.1.  All hospitals within the City and County of San Francisco shall develop a written

transfer agreement with a:
2.4.1.1.  LEMSA designated Trauma Center and an EMS designated Pediatric Trauma

Center

2.4.1.2.  Hospital that has a certified Pediatric Intensive Care Unit
2.4.1.3.  EMS designated Adult and Pediatric Burn Center

2.5.  No transfer will take place without the transferring physician ensuring that:

2.5.1.  The patient received an appropriate medical screening examination and medical

treatment within the transferring facility’s capacity that minimizes the risks to the
patient’s health;

2.5.2.  There is a receiving physician;
2.5.3.  The receiving facility has the capacity to care for the patient and has consented to

receive the patient;

2.5.4.  All available medical records regarding the patient’s diagnosis and care have been

made available to the receiving facility;

2.5.5.  The patient has no emergency medical condition or has a stabilized emergency medical

condition;

2.5.6.  An appropriate method of transport is arranged;

1

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 5030

EFFECTIVE DATE: 10/1/25

2.5.7.  There will be attendance by appropriately licensed or certified personnel with the

essential equipment and medications needed to ensure appropriate treatment during
transport.

2.6.  The sending physician is responsible for approving the category of qualifications of

transporting personnel
2.6.1.  Determining level of care necessary for transport will be done in accordance with

Section 3.5.

2.6.2.  When determining the necessary qualifications, consideration must be given to the

length of time the patient is expected to be in the care of the transporting personnel,
the patient’s condition at the time of transfer, and the likelihood of the patient’s
condition deteriorating during the transport

2.6.3.  When a reasonable possibility exists that a patient may deteriorate during the

transport, the sending physician will require the attendance of personnel capable of
caring for the patient in the event of such deterioration

2.7.  The sending physician remains responsible for the patient until such time as the patient arrives

at and is accepted by the intended receiving facility and receiving physician.
2.7.1.  Medical control of prehospital personnel remains with the EMS Agency Medical

Director and the Base Hospital Physician.

2.7.2.  Prehospital personnel will not exceed their scope of practice while caring for patients

during interfacility transfers

2.7.3.  Registered Nurses accompanying patients on transports will operate under the medical

control of the sending physician.

2.8.  The primary provider of emergency response to 9-1-1 requests in San Francisco shall not do

interfacility transport except when:
2.8.1.  A helicopter has landed and has an unstable patient requiring emergent transport to a
hospital and the pre-arranged ground transport has failed to provide service
2.8.1.1.  Helicopters shall not leave the sending facility without prearranged ground
transport from the landing site to the intended receiving hospital

2.8.2.  A critical trauma patient requires emergent transport to a local Trauma Center in

accordance with a written transfer agreement

2.8.3.  An unstable patient requires emergent transport from an Emergency Department to
another the sending hospital cannot, and delay in receiving such care poses an
imminent threat to the patient’s health (examples may include: STEMI Activation,
Stroke/Large Vessel Occlusion (LVO), OB emergency, etc).

2.9.  All incidents under Section 2.7 and 2.8 require an Exception Report be filed with the EMS

Agency within 24 hours of the incident.
2.9.1.  Responsibility for filing the report rests with the sending physician except in the case of

helicopters, in which case the helicopter crew is responsible.

2

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 5030

EFFECTIVE DATE: 10/1/25

3.  PROCEDURE

3.1.  Sending hospital, under the direction of the sending physician, shall arrange for appropriate

method of transportation.
3.1.1.  Non-911 Basic Life Support ambulance (BLS) – to send stable patients between acute

care facilities or to sub-acute care facilities (including home).

3.1.2.  Non-911 Advanced Life Support ambulance (ALS) – to send stable patients that

require cardiac monitoring or may require intervention that is within the Paramedic
Scope of Practice and for non-life-threatening conditions.
3.1.2.1.  In the event of sudden, unexpected patient deterioration the paramedic in
attendance will treat the patient according to existing ALS protocols and/or
Base Physician direction

3.1.3.  Critical Care Transport-Paramedic (CCT-P) – for sending stable patients requiring

continuous therapy not included in the paramedic basic scope of practice, patients
who have a reasonable expectation of deterioration during the transport, or unstable
patients requiring transfer for specialty care.

3.1.4.  Critical Care Transport (RN) – for sending stable patients requiring continuous therapy
not included in the paramedic scope of practice, patients who have a reasonable
expectation of deterioration during the transport, or unstable patients requiring
transfer for specialty care.

3.1.5.  In the event a patient with an emergent medical condition is not stabilized or a patient

requiring CCT level care requires immediate transport and the only available
ambulance is either BLS or ALS:
3.1.5.1.  The sending physician must accompany the patient (or designate a qualified

individual to accompany the patient) with all essential equipment and
medications.

3.1.5.2.  In the rare exception a physician or qualified individual is unable to

accompany a patient for a point-to-point interfacility transfer within the City
and County of San Francisco limits:
•  Consider Base hospital consultation, discontinue interventions and/or

medications outside of the provider’s Scope of Practice for a short period
of time, when it would be safe to do so, and replace with in-scope
alternatives if possible (e.g. temporarily discontinue ventilator and
manually ventilate intubated patient, replace out-of-scope vasopressor
with epinephrine drip, discontinue out-of-scope sedative and replace with
midazolam IVP).

•  The patient outcome may result in severe morbidity or mortality by not

completing the transfer to specialty center.

•  The EMS Agency Duty Officer must be notified, and an Exception Report

must be submitted.

3

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 5030

EFFECTIVE DATE: 10/1/25

•  The EMS Agency will consider forwarding the incident to the California

Department of Public Health to review for an EMTALA violation. The EMS
Agency will meet with Receiving Facility staff to review status as an EMS
Receiving Facility.

•  When the patient has not consented to or requested the transfer, the

sending physician is solely responsible for the clinical decision to send the
patient, and the outcome is subject to standard rules regarding clinical
outcomes.

3.2.  Sending hospital will transfer care to the transport personnel and provide all documentation

needed to continue care of the patient at the receiving facility.
3.2.1.  Transfer of care includes a verbal report to the transporting personnel from the
sending physician or nurse caring for the patient at the time of transport.

3.2.2.  Transporting personnel will be provided with patient information necessary to continue

care of the patient and complete any required patient care reports.

3.3.  Transporting personnel will assume cand continue care of patient until such time as patient

care is transferred to the receiving facility staff along with all documents necessary to continue
care of the patient.
3.3.1.  Transporting personnel will provide advance notification via radio while enroute to the

receiving facility if:
3.3.1.1.  The patient is a transfer for higher level of care; and
3.3.1.2.  The patient’s destination is the receiving facility’s Emergency Department.
3.3.2.  Transfer of care includes a verbal report to the receiving facility staff assigned to care

for the patient.

3.4.  Patient belongings, supplies, and equipment shall only be transported with the patient in such

amounts that can be safely secured in the ambulance.
3.4.1.  Transport personnel will not assume responsibility for controlled substances or

medications in unsealed packages.

3.5.  Guidelines for determining level of care

3.5.1.  The following table identifies the minimum level of care required for the type of care

needed or equipment required during transport.

4.  AUTHORITY

4.1.  California Health and Safety Code, §§ 1797.204, 1797.206, 1797.222, 1798.170, & 1798.172
4.2.  California Code of Regulations, Title 22, §§ 100066.02, 100091.01, 100091.03, 100097.02,

100111.03, & 100139

4

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 5030

EFFECTIVE DATE: 10/1/25

The Scope of Practice shall not exceed the limits defined under Policy 2000 for EMT and
Paramedic personnel, and Policy 4070 and Section 12 and for Critical Care Paramedic (CCP).

Staff

EMT

Level of
Care
Basic Life
Support
(BLS)

Paramedic

Advanced
Life Support
(ALS)
Paramedic

CCT-RN
CCT-P

Critical
Care (CCT –
RN or CCT-
CP)

Table 1: EMS Scope of Practice

Patient Type

•  Scope of Practice Includes*

Stable
(E.g. 4 rib fracture
on 4L NC O2)

Stable
(E.g. non-emergent
cardiac cath lab)
Stabilized
May need blood
pressure and
respiratory,
monitoring and
support
(E.g. intracranial
hemorrhage on
clevidipine drip)

IV locked

•
•  O2 cannula or mask
•

Equipment: nasogastric tube, gastric tube, foley
catheter, patient-controlled device (e.g. insulin pump)

•
IV fluids (e.g. LR/NS)
•  CPAP. No ventilator.
•  Cardiac monitoring
•
•  Medications: all meds permitted in local scope of

Equipment: chest tube water seal, arterial line capped

practice except no IV pump infusion
Intubated stable ventilator settings, BIPAP, high flow

•
•  Cardiac monitoring, blood pressure monitoring
•

Equipment (CCT-RN only): transvenous pacer, arterial
line, intracranial pressure line, mechanical circulatory
support (Impella®, Intra-aortic balloon pump, ECMO)

•  Medications: titratable IV medications

Paramedic

9-1-1
Advanced
Life Support
(ALS)

Same scope of practice as ALS above
Patient type: stabilized patient with time sensitive emergency requiring definitive
treatment.
•
•  May include: STEMI Activation, Stroke/LVO, OB emergency

Includes: Emergent Trauma

* If medications /interventions exceed the EMS scope of practice an extended service provider
(MD/NP/PA/RN) must accompany the patient.

‡ 9-1-1 EMS resources are only indicated when appropriate interfacility transportation is not available
quickly enough for a time sensitive emergency.

5

