SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

Policy Reference No.: 6020

Effective Date:  August 1, 2007
Review Date: January 1, 2011
Supersedes:  February 1, 2005

INCIDENT REPORTING

I.  PURPOSE

A.  To establish a peer to peer report and response mechanism for resolving issues
and incidents that are reportable but are not a threat to public health and safety
or pose a threat to the integrity of the EMS system.

B.  To establish a mechanism for reporting and investigating issues and incidents

which pose a threat to the integrity of the EMS system and/or possibly
constitute a violation of California Health and Safety Code Section 1798.200
et seq.

C.  To set standards for regular reporting of incidents to the EMS Agency for the
purpose of monitoring the EMS system and identification of opportunities for
improvement in clinical outcomes and/or system structures and processes.

II.  AUTHORITY

A.  California Health and Safety Code, Sections 1797.204, 1797.220, and 1798
B.  California Code of Regulations, Sections 100147 and 100402

III. POLICY

Overview  of Incident Reporting

Level I
Peer to Peer Reporting

Level II
Exception Reporting

Level III
Mandatory Reporting

• For minor interpersonal issues,

misunderstandings or
operational issues not
involving patient care.

• Resolve as soon as possible

after the incident in person or
by telephone with supervisors
or management
representatives.

• For patient care issues
complete an EMSA
Exception Form and fax or
mail to provider
management. This includes
commendations.

• For system issues involving
patient care, mail or fax
report to EMSA.

• If unsure whether the issue is
Level I or II or if the issue
cannot be resolved at this level,
an Exception Report should be
submitted.

• Reporting party may also call
provider management or
EMSA to verbally report an
incident which will be
documented on the Exception
Form by the provider.

• Includes, but not limited to:

incidents involving:

Clinical acts or omissions that
may be a threat to public
health and safety or
considered negligent or
contributing to poor patient
outcome;

Violations of EMS policies
and treatment protocols that
may result in poor patient
outcome; and

Use of intoxicants or impaired
ability due to alcohol or drugs
while on duty.

• Report to the EMSA within 24

hrs.

Policy Reference No.: 6020
Effective Date: August 1, 2007

A.  Peer to Peer Reporting:

4.  Any incident or event such as minor interpersonal conflicts,

misunderstandings and demeanor issues that are unrelated to patient
care activities or minor operational issues.

B.  Exception Reporting

4.  Any incident or event which the reporting party believes warrants

reporting to another EMS system participant shall be documented and
forwarded by the reporting party to all other agencies involved.

e)  Reportable incidents or events include, but are not limited to:
(1) Policy or protocol violations not related to clinical care
or patient outcome;

(2) Deviation from authorized use of supplies or
equipment;
(3) Documentation error or omission not related to patient
care;
(4) Communication errors;
(5) Destination errors with no impact on patient outcome;
(6) Near miss incidents; and
(7) Operational (non-clinical) issues.

f)  Commendations may also be submitted to communicate
exceptional care by an individual or group of providers.

5.  Exception will be documented using a form developed by the EMS

Agency.

e)  Copies of all supporting documents, such as PCRs, hospital

records, dispatch logs, etc. must be included.

6.  The EMS Agency shall log all Exception Reports for the purposes of

data collection and analysis.

7.   In the event that a recipient of an Exception Report fails to respond, or

provides an inadequate response, the reporting party may inform
EMSA of the failure and request follow-up action on closure reporting.

C.  Mandatory Reporting

4.  Any event that is actionable pursuant to Health & Safety Code Section
1798.200 shall be reported, within 24 hours, to the EMS Agency Duty
Officer (refer to Procedure IV.D.).

e)  Reportable events include, but are not limited to:

(1) Use of intoxicants or impaired ability due to alcohol or

drugs while on duty as an EMS provider.

Page 2

Policy Reference No.: 6020
Effective Date: August 1, 2007

(2) Clinical acts or omissions that may be considered
negligent or possibly contributed to a poor patient
outcome.

(3) Deviation from EMS policy or protocol that may result

in a poor patient outcome.

(4) Any act or omission that constitutes a threat to public

health and safety.

(5) Any event where recurrence would have a significant

chance of adverse outcome.

5.  Any individual with direct knowledge of a Mandatory Reporting

incident is required to complete a written report and submit it directly
to the EMS Agency within 72 hours (refer to Procedure IV.D.).

e)  Employers may require concurrent reporting internally, but

shall not preclude, inhibit, or delay direct reporting to the EMS
Agency.

6.  Written reports, using a form developed by the EMS Agency, shall be

completed and submitted to the EMS Agency within 72 hours.
e)  The written report must include copies of all pertinent

documentation, including but not limited to:

(1) Patient care records
(2) Dispatch logs
(3) Written statements by involved personnel
(4) Summary of initial investigation and actions taken by

agency (when applicable and available).

7.  The EMS Agency shall lead Mandatory Reporting Investigations
e)  All providers shall assist the EMS Agency and complete

requests in the time frame determined by the EMS Agency
investigator.

f)  EMS provider agencies shall make available all personnel
involved with or having knowledge of the incident for
interviews by the EMS Agency investigator.

g)  Provider agencies shall allow the EMS Agency access to

proprietary or confidential information directly pertinent to the
investigation.

h)  All Mandatory Reporting investigations shall be completed

within 30 days or as soon as reasonably possible.

i)  The EMS Agency shall provide a report of the findings and

actions to the reporting party.

(1) Investigative reports will not disclose confidential or

proprietary information collected during the
investigation.

(2) Final reports may be delayed indefinitely if their release
will compromise another investigation of the incident
or involved personnel being performed by another
regulatory or investigative authority.

Page 3

Policy Reference No.: 6020
Effective Date: August 1, 2007

D.  Provider Reporting

1.  All EMS ambulance providers will submit a report, at intervals

determined by the EMS Agency, using a standard format developed by
the EMS Agency, which includes the following elements:

a)  A summary of all issues received and actions taken related to the

delivery of EMS and/or patient care.

b)  A summary of all Exception and Mandatory Reporting incidents

received and actions taken.

c)  An  analysis  of  any  trends  identified  in  the  types  of  incidents

being reported.

d)  The  status  of  all  open  Exception  and  Mandatory  Reporting
investigations, including work and remedial actions in progress.
e)  A  summary of  quality  assurance  and performance  improvement

activities to include:
(1) Any audits required by the EMS Agency.
(2) Any education pertaining to clinical care or EMS operations.
(3) Any internal projects in progress.

IV. PROCEDURE

A.  Peer to Peer Reports

1.  When incidents involving minor interpersonal issues,

misunderstandings or minor operational issues not involving patient
care occur,  reporting party shall directly contact supervisor or
management representatives of the recipient agency to resolve the
issue as soon as possible after the incident by telephone or in person.
2.  Providers will log these reports and document actions to resolve the

problems in a timely manner.

3.  If unsure whether the issue is Level I or Level II submit as an
Exception Report or contact the EMSA staff for guidance.

4.  If the issue cannot be resolved at Level I or has become a repeated

problem submit as an Exception Report.

B.  Exception Reporting

1.  Reporting party will complete a written report on a form developed by
the EMS Agency or call the provider or EMSA to verbally report an
incident which will be documented on the Exception Form by the
individual receiving the report.

2.  Reporting party will forward form, along with all supporting

documentation to the provider agency’s management for individual
clinical issues or to the EMSA for system issues.

3.  The provider agency will fax a copy of the report to the EMS Agency

within 72 hours of receipt.

4.  To close the incident, the provider or EMSA will  issue a report of the
investigation and actions taken to the reporting party within 30 days of
receipt.

Page 4

Policy Reference No.: 6020
Effective Date: August 1, 2007

a)  This policy shall not require that recipients consult with
reporting party regarding any actions taken, only that the
reporting party be notified of the findings and actions.

(1)  This policy shall not require any agency to disclose any
information of a proprietary or confidential nature to the
reporting party.

b)  Written closure reports will be made using either the EMSA

form or a letter/internal form that addresses the same elements
of the EMSA form. The recipient may orally conduct the
closure report with the reporting party. At that time, the
provider will ask the reporting party if a copy of the written
closure report is desired. The provider will log the manner in
which the closure was provided to the reporting party and
provide a copy of the closure report to the EMS Agency.

C.  Mandatory Reporting

1.  Any person with direct knowledge of an incident asdefined in III, C,1
shall notify the EMS Agency Duty Officer within 24 hours of the
event in writing by faxing the report to the EMSA or by verbal report
on the telephone. The Duty Officer can be contacted through the 911
Dispatch Center at the Department of Emergency Management.

a)  In cases with multiple people from the same agency having
knowledge of an event, one notification to the EMS Agency
Duty Officer may be made, however individual written reports
are still required.

b)  The person(s) reporting the incident may, in addition, choose to

also directly contact a field supervisor or management
representative of the involved provider.

2.  Each person with direct knowledge of a Mandatory Reporting Incident

shall submit a written report, on a form developed by the EMS
Agency, along with supporting documentation within 72 hours.

3.  The EMS Agency Duty Officer shall:

a)  Verify that the incident qualifies for Mandatory Reporting , and
b)   Initiate an investigation consistent with the requirements of

Policy 2070, or

c)  If an incident does not qualify as Mandatory Reporting, the

reporting party shall be notified and the matter will be pursued
as an Exception Report, as detailed in IV, B..

4.  Upon notification of the incident, management at the involved

provider agency will conduct an investigation and submit a report of
the findings to the EMS Agency on a form developed by the EMS
Agency along with supporting documentation. The report will be due
within 30-days or sooner at the discretion of the EMS Agency.

Page 5

Policy Reference No.: 6020
Effective Date: August 1, 2007

5.  EMS Agency shall review all information from EMSA led fact finding
and from reports of the involved agencies to determine the outcome of
the investigation and  any corrective actions. Investigations will be
completed within 30-days, or as soon as reasonably possible.

a)  In cases where personnel or information is not available, the

investigative period may be extended, with the approval of the
EMS Medical Director, as necessary to ensure a
comprehensive and equitable investigation.

6.  The EMS Agency will prepare a final report that will include the

following elements:

a)  Investigation summary
b)  Identified causes, including system or process inadequacies

that require correction.
c)  Recommended actions

7.  Provider agencies will prepare a corrective action plan that addresses
any organizational, mechanical, or process causes and will include
method of correction and anticipated completion date.

a)  Corrective action plan shall be submitted to EMS Agency for
review and approval no later than 30 days after being notified
of deficiencies.

8.  EMS Medical Director may take action as determined appropriate

pursuant to the California Health and Safety Code Section 1798.200 et
seq. and EMS Policy 2070.

9.

Provider Reporting

a)  Each EMS provider agency shall compile data as described
above and submit it to the EMS Agency by the required
deadline..

b)  The data will be submitted in a format developed by the EMS

Agency.

c)  All data elements will be defined by the EMS Agency.

Page 6

