SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

Policy Reference No.:    6040
Effective Date: August 1, 2008
Review Date: January 1, 2011
Supersedes:  February 1, 2005

PILOT PROGRAMS

I.  PURPOSE

A.  To define the process by which the San Francisco Emergency Medical Services
(EMS) Agency plans, develops, implements, and monitors Pilot Programs.

II.  AUTHORITY

A.  California Health and Safety Code, Section 1797 et seq. and 1798 et seq.; California
Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9.

III. REFERENCE

A.  California Health and Safety Code, Section 1797 et seq. and 1798 et seq.; California
Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 9.

IV. POLICY

A.  The EMS Agency Medical Director must review and approve of all Pilot Programs
prior to implementation.
B.  Pilot Program studies are typically small scale and short term for the purpose of
evaluating quality indictors and/or operational improvements for local EMS policies
and/or protocols.
C.  Projects involving any of the following will be considered as research and require
approval according to Research Policy 6030:

A.  Changes in the State EMS Authority EMT-P Scope of Practice or untested

intervention.

B.  The goal of the project is to test a hypothesis.
C.  The investigators intend to submit the results for publication in a professional

journal.

D.  When questions arise as whether a project is quality improvement versus research,

the investigator will consult with the Institutional Review Board.

D.  The Pilot Program Investigator(s) shall submit a Pilot Program Proposal to the EMS
Agency at least three months prior to the planned implementation date in order to allow
time for EMS Advisory Committee Review.

1.  The EMS Agency shall review the Pilot Program Protocol and solicit EMS
Stakeholder input through the Protocol Review Process in Section IV.

2.  Investigator(s) must submit the Pilot Program Proposal according to the following

structure:

Page 1

Policy Reference No.:    6040
Effective Date: August 1, 2008

a)  Background/Significance: Describe the rationale for the Pilot Program,
citing relevant research. Identify what questions remain and how the
proposed Pilot Program will address these questions. Specify how the
Pilot Program may improve the quality of care in the EMS System.
b)  Objectives: List the objectives upon which the outcome of the Pilot

Program will be based. Identify the predictor and outcome variables and
the expected outcome of the Pilot Program.

c)  Design/Methods: Identify the type of study, the outcome variables to be
measured and how each is an indicator of quality of care. Describe the
methods used to collect the data and avoid bias.

d)  Evaluation: Describe the data management and statistical methods that

will be used to evaluate the data. Include methods used to minimize bias
and standards or benchmarks proposed to accept the conclusions.

e)  References: Attach copies of references cited in the protocol.

V.

PILOT PROGRAM REVIEW PROCESS

A.  The EMS Agency Medical Director shall review the Pilot Program Protocol and will
either forward the protocol to the EMS Advisory Committee for review or return to the
Investigator for modifications.
B.  The EMS Advisory Committee will review the protocol, provide feedback and vote to
recommend approval, modifications or disapproval of the proposed Pilot Program.
C.  After review of the recommendations by the EMS Advisory Committee, the EMS
Agency Medical Director may present the proposed Pilot Program to the Director of
Health.
D.  The EMS Agency Medical Director will approve or deny the implementation of the
Pilot Program. If approved, the data collection period is one year.

VI.  REPORTING PROCESS

A.  Monthly Reports: The Pilot Program Investigator shall submit monthly reports to the
EMS Agency on the 15th day of each month. These reports must summarize the progress
of the program and evaluate available outcome data from the previous month. The need
for quarterly reports in addition to or instead of monthly reports will be determined by the
EMS Agency Medical Director.

B.  Final Report: At the end of the one year data collection period, the Investigator must
submit a final report to the EMS Agency Medical Director. The final report must include
a summary of the Pilot Program including the objectives, methods, data analysis of the
outcome variables, the limitations of the study and the conclusions. The final report is
due no later than the 15th day of the 3rd month following program completion.

VII.  COMPLETION OF PILOT PROGRAM

Page 2

Policy Reference No.:    6040
Effective Date: August 1, 2008

A.  At the completion of the Pilot Program, the EMS Medical Director will assign one of
the following designations:
1.  Approved
2.  The Pilot Program demonstrates improved quality of care. EMS policies
and/or treatment protocols may be revised pursuant to EMS Agency Policy 1060.
3.  Extended (up to one year)
4.  There is insufficient data to evaluate the impact of the Pilot Program on
quality of care and the data collection period must be extended.
5.  Closed
6.  The Pilot Program does not demonstrate an improvement in quality of care.

B.  The EMS Agency will present the results of the Pilot Program and the
recommendations of the EMS Medical Director to the EMS Advisory Committee.

Page 3

