SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY

MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AT SPECIAL EVENTS

EFFECTIVE DATE: 4/1/25

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 7010

SUPERSEDES:10/1/24

1.  PURPOSE

1.1.  Establish minimum standards for emergency medical services at mass gatherings, special

events, and reduce impact to the 911 system.

2.  POLICY

2.1.  The term “Special Event” is used in this policy to refer to: any gathering with an expected peak
crowd size of more than 1,000 people at any one time; events with more than 100 swimmers;
any parade as deﬁned in Article 4 of the San Francisco Police Code; Major Events or Athletic
Events as deﬁned in Article 6 of the San Francisco Transportation Code; and events permitted
under Chapter 90 of the San Francisco Administrative Code; and events designated by other
government agencies such as the United States Coast Guard, Port of San Francisco, National
Park Services and San Francisco Recreation and Parks.

2.2.  Special Event Medical Plans requiring review by the EMS Agency Medical Director, or designee
shall meet the EMSA assigned Level designation or greater based on the Risk Assessment
Matrix in Appendix A.

2.3.  The EMS Agency Medical Director has the ﬁnal authority in determining the applicability of
any standard, Level designation, and what shall be considered an adequate Event Medical
Plan.

3.  SPECIAL EVENT MEDICAL PLANS

3.1.  Special Event Medical Plans shall include, but not be limited to, the following considerations:

3.1.1.  Event description, including event name, location and expected attendance.
3.1.2.  Participant safety (the safety plan for event participants and spectators)
3.1.3.  Non-participant safety (the safety plan for individuals not participating in, but aﬀected

by the event such as neighboring local residents and on-lookers)

3.1.4.  Descriptions of the following medical resources:

3.1.4.1.  Personnel certiﬁed in cardio-pulmonary resuscitation, rapid access to

automatic external deﬁbrillator(s), and 911 access;

3.1.4.2.  First aid station(s) (if indicated; see Appendix A);
3.1.4.3.  Ambulance(s) (if indicated; see Appendix A);
3.1.4.4.  Mobile medical resource(s) (if indicated; see Appendix A); and

1

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 7010

EFFECTIVE DATE: 4/1/25

3.1.4.5.  In addition to ﬁrst aid supplies, a Multi Casualty Incident Medical Kit with

medical equipment for 50 victims (Policy 4001). MCI Kit must be the MCI kit
as required on Ambulances; however, Boards/Worksheets and Position Vests
are optional.

3.2.  Special Event Communications Plans, including name(s) and contact information for the event

leader and a point of contact on the day of the event, a description of direct routine
communications, and a description of disaster communications if cell phones are not available
(e.g., two-way radios). A description of communications between the following shall be
included:
3.2.1.  Venue staﬀ and/or security personnel, event coordinator, and medical personnel;
3.2.2.  Medical personnel located at a ﬁrst aid station and mobile resources and/or satellite

stations;

3.2.3.  Medical personnel and the City and County 911 Dispatch Center;
3.2.4.  Medical personnel and ambulances as applicable, and
3.2.5.  Medical staﬀ at Receiving Hospitals as applicable.

3.3.  Disaster Plan describing the ability to care for a minimum of 50 event attendees and staﬀ as

casualties. The plan must include training of all events medical personnel in the disaster plan,
the START disaster triage system, and all appropriate necessary equipment. This may be done
at any time prior to the start of the event.

4.  EMT SERVICES AT SPECIAL EVENTS

4.1.  On-site medical personnel shall be minimally certiﬁed as an EMT-1 in California and equipped
to provide the complete EMT-1 Scope of Practice as deﬁned in California Code of Regulations,
Title 22, Section 100066.02. They shall follow San Francisco EMS Agency Policies and
Protocols.

4.2.  Paramedics equipped and used to provide Basic Life Support need only be licensed by the

State of California.

5.  PARAMEDIC SERVICES AT SPECIAL EVENTS

5.1.  Paramedics, utilizing the Advanced Life Support Scope of Practice, deployed as part of a

Special Events Medical Plan shall be:
5.1.1.  Licensed in the state of California;
5.1.2.  Approved by the EMS Agency as:

5.1.2.1.  Accredited in the City and County of San Francisco

5.1.3.  On-duty with an approved San Francisco ALS Service Provider for the duration of the

event for which they are deployed; and
5.1.4.  Equipped to provide Advanced Life Support care.

5.2.  Paramedics shall follow San Francisco EMS Agency Policies and Protocols. An on-scene

physician may provide medical direction only as allowed in EMS Agency Policy #4041 Physician
on Scene.

2

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 7010

EFFECTIVE DATE: 4/1/25

6.  AMBULANCE SERVICES AT SPECIAL EVENTS

6.1.  Ambulances deployed as part of the approved Event Medical Plan shall be permitted for

operation in San Francisco by the EMS Agency.

6.2.  Should an ambulance transport from the event, Department of Emergency Communications
(DEC) shall be notiﬁed. DEC and/or Ambulance Providers will not regularly backﬁll an
additional unit to a special event.

7.  AUTOMATIC EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATORS

7.1.  Automatic External Deﬁbrillators (AEDs) should be made accessible to medical personnel and
non-medical personnel trained in its use and located throughout the venue in location(s) that
will enable the ﬁrst shock to a person in cardiac arrest within 5 minutes of notiﬁcation of
qualiﬁed personnel. The current San Francisco EMS Response Interval Standard for time to
deﬁbrillation must be met by the responding agencies.

8.  PROCEDURES FOR SUBMITTING SPECIAL EVENT MEDICAL PLANS

8.1.  Special Event Medical Plans shall be submitted following guidelines posted on the San

Francisco EMS Agency website. Plans shall be submitted 30 days in advance.

8.2.  A fee will be assessed for each medical plan and payment must be made upon submission of

the medical plan.

8.3.  The EMS Agency Medical Director or designee shall review the Special Event Medical Plan

within 15 days and respond to both the event sponsor and the City permitting agency as
follows:
8.3.1.  Approved without modiﬁcation.
8.3.2.  Approval pending submission of additional information speciﬁed by the reviewer.
8.3.3.  Not approved with an explanation of the decision.

8.4.  The event sponsor may appeal the decision by resubmitting the plan to the EMS Agency
Medical Director. A review will occur within 5 days of receipt. The EMS Agency Medical
Director’s decision shall be delivered to the event sponsor within 5 business days of the
review.

9.  PROCEDURES FOR SUBMITTING POST-EVENT MEDICAL TREATMENT REPORTS

9.1.  The event sponsor will submit an Event Medical Treatment Report, within 3 business days of
the conclusion of the event, to the EMS Agency Medical Director or designee. The report will
provide a summary of the medical incidents during the event that involved the EMS plan
medical resources. This summary will include at a minimum the number of patients seen at
the ﬁrst aid station(s) or other facilities, their age, gender, chief complaint, and disposition.

10. EMS AGENCY STAFF CONTACT

10.1. The EMS Agency staﬀ point of contact for questions on this policy or Special Event Medical
Plans may be reached via contact information published on the EMS Agency website.

3

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 7010

EFFECTIVE DATE: 4/1/25

11. BLS USE, TRANSPORTATION, AND DOCUMENTATION FROM SPECIAL EVENTS

11.1. If Advanced Life Support (ALS) is available at the special event, an ALS Assessment should

occur prior to transport by a Basic Life Support (BLS) ambulance, in accordance with the ALS
Criteria in Appendix C.
11.1.1. If an ALS resource is providing triage or determination of BLS patients, the individual or

unit shall be designated in the EMS medical plan.

11.2. A BLS ambulance can transport without an ALS Assessment under the following criteria:

11.2.1. The patient does not meet any ALS Criteria (Appendix C) guidelines
11.2.2. The patient is being transported from inside a designated special event or event box.
11.2.3. The event has an approved medical plan on ﬁle with the EMS Agency.

11.3. If a BLS ambulance transport from a Special Event, the following conditions shall apply:

11.3.1. On departure from special event, BLS ambulance shall notify DEC of transport. DEC will

not regularly backﬁll an additional unit to a special event.

11.3.2. EMTs transporting from the special event shall have at a minimum, 4 hours of an EMS

Agency approved and provider documented annual training in:
11.3.2.1. Field to Hospital Communications including Early Notiﬁcation
11.3.2.2. Communications to DEC
11.3.2.3. Patient assessment skills
11.3.2.4. ALS Criteria
11.3.2.5. Hospital Destinations and Designations
11.3.2.6. Hospital Diversion
11.3.2.7. Documentation including Patient Declines Transport (PDT)

11.3.3. The preceding paragraph 11.3.2. is waived if EMT already meets requirements in EMSA
Policy 2000, Section 6 “Required Training for Independent Work Assignment on an ALS
Ambulance”

11.3.4. All patient transported via BLS Ambulance with or without an ALS Assessment shall
submit a PCR and exception report to the EMS Agency within 24 hours of transport.

11.4. A BLS ambulance can transport without an ALS assessment from a special event when

authorized under separate EMSA policies.
11.4.1. This policy shall not supersede EMSA Policy 4041 “On-Viewed Incidents.” For critical,
life-threatening conditions, the BLS ambulance may transport if the ETA to the closest
receiving hospital is less than the ETA of responding ALS resources.

11.4.2. BLS transportation from a special event is intended for MCI/surge plans pursuant to

EMSA Policy 7010 or by EMSA medical director approval via memo. BLS transportation
is not to be utilized in regular, daily 911 operations and responses.

11.4.3. Documentation

11.4.3.1. EMTs that are an approved resource within an approved EMS medical plan

may respond, evaluate, and create PDT documentation (NOT Against Medical
Advice).

11.4.3.2. All AMA patients require an ALS Assessment and shall follow Policy 4040

procedures.

4

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 7010

EFFECTIVE DATE: 4/1/25

12. AUTHORITY

12.1. California Health and Safety Code, §§ 1797.202, 1797.204, 1797.220, 1798
12.2. California Code of Regulation, Title 22, §§ 100091.02, 100094.02, & 100096.01
12.3. San Francisco Transportation Code, Division I, Article 6
12.4. San Francisco Police Code Article 4
12.5. Administrative Code section 90.4

5

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 7010

EFFECTIVE DATE: 4/1/25

APPENDIX A

GUIDELINES FOR MINIMUM MEDICAL RESOURCES AT SPECIAL EVENTS

Level: The Level, ranked from 1 (most resources) to 5 (least amount of resources), determines
the minimum resources required at a special event. An event must have the available resources
based on the highest ranked level based upon known risk factors (i.e., Event promoter shall
follow Level 1 guidelines if ranked to both Level 1 and Level 3).

Mitigating Factors: If an event has factors that are less likely to impact the 911 system, the Level
can be reduced by 1 Level for a one-time reduction. To be considered for a reduction by the
EMSA, the event shall be reoccurring and meet mitigating factors in ﬂow chart listed below. If an
event is reduced by 1 Level and impacts the 911 system or event-type changes, the reduction
can be revoked by the EMSA Medical Director for future events. The reduction is assessed each
year.

All Levels: All Levels shall have CPR trained responders with AEDs and CPR plus 911 access.

Level 1: Highest Level for minimum medical resources. A Level 1 ranking usually results in city-
wide response and coordination. Multiple ALS and BLS units (greater than 4) need to be
obtained. ALS resources are required. Foot teams, bikes, gators, and event EMTs are likely to be
used heavily. Department of Emergency Communications (DEC) should have an on-site
dispatcher. EMSA should have an EMSA Liaison designated for the event. A BLS memo may be
pre-approved by the EMSA Medical Director or ready for implementation if necessary for the
911 system.

Level 2: Second-highest Level for minimum medical resources. A Level 2 ranking usually results
in some public safety department response and coordination. Multiple ALS and BLS units (3 or
greater) need to be obtained. ALS resources are required. Foot teams, bikes, gators, and event
EMTs are likely to be used heavily. Depending on the event, a Department of Emergency
Communications (DEC) may have an on-site dispatcher, and EMSA may have an EMSA Liaison
designated for the event. Usually, a BLS memo is unnecessary for a Level 2 event.

Level 3: A Level 3 ranking requires 1-2 ALS ambulances. ALS is required for a Level 3 ranking.
Foot teams, bikes, gators, and event EMTs shall augment ambulance resources, if appropriate,
depending on event footprint.

Level 4: A Level 4 ranking requires at a minimum 1 BLS ambulance. Foot teams, bikes, gators,
and event EMTs shall augment ambulance resources, if appropriate, depending on event
footprint.

Level 5: A Level 5 ranking requires event EMTs that have the ability to readily access the entire
event footprint.

6

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 7010

EFFECTIVE DATE: 4/1/25

Swim or Water Events: If an event has a swim or water component, it shall have the additional
resources in addition to the ranked level. A Paramedic or EMT shall be stationed on a boat with
deck access to perform high quality CPR. If an EMT is utilized, the EMT shall have 2+ years of
911 experience and have direct access to 911 Center. Use of a mechanical compressor on the
boat shall be considered. Predesignated areas for transport rendezvous must be submitted on
map upon plan submission to EMS Agency. Personal Watercrafts (PWCs) or Jet Skis do not carry
medical equipment and do not replace Paramedics or EMTs on boats.

Reoccurring Event: An event is eligible for a one-step reduction in initial Level designation if the
event has minimal patients treated on-site, transports from event, or impact to the 911 system.
The one-time reduction from the initial Level is re-evaluated each year or subsequent event
based on post-event treatment report and impact to 911 system. This usually applies to family-
type events, community-based organizations, and established, re-occurring events. The event
promotor must request this reduction as part of the planning process. This approval or denial of
the request is determined by the EMSA Medical Director or designee.

7

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 7010                                                                                                                                                                                                                        EFFECTIVE DATE 4/1/25

Peak crowd size >1000 or
>100 swimmers?

NO

911 and CPR/AED
access

YES

Needs a medical plan

Is the peak crowd size >2500

YES

Needs ambulance(s)

NO

Data shows impact to EMS
system, unknown event, or
1st times event?

YES

Level 1-4

NO

Is ETOH, cannabis or other
drug-use on site (known or
suspected?

NO

YES

Level 1-3 and consider
sobering services

Distance run (>10k)

YES

Level 3-4

NO

Swim or water component to
event

YES

Level 3-4  and water
assest

NO

Is crowd larger than 20k?

YES

Level 1-3

NO

DHS SEAR event/EOC
activation/high profile

YES

Level 1-2

NO

Free Speech Event

YES

Level 5

NO

If all answers “no”

YES

Level 4

•

•  Reoccuring Event/Non-
Impact Events ONLY
•  Does your event have
mitigating factors?
Family-type event,
cooperate event,
community based
organization (CBO)
•  Event does not impact
911 system, host
similar/multiple events
per year
•  Known event
•  No or minimal patients
treated on-site or EMS
transport from event
•  Compliance with EMSA

policies such as
submission of post-
treatment report

YES

NO

Reduce Level by
1 (one-time) on
EMSA approval

Final Level
EMSA Medical
Director (or
designee) makes
final
determination

Suggested Resources

Level 1+Multiple ALS/BLS (4+) Ambulances, DEC dispatcher,EMSA Liaison, memo, Event EMTs
Level 2+Multiple ALS/BLS (3+) Ambulances. Event EMT’s
Level 3=1-2 ALS Ambulances, Event EMTs
Level 4=1 BLS Ambulance, Event EMTs
Level 5= First aid tent, Event EMTs

•
•
•
•
•
•  Swim or water events= Paramedic or EMT on boat, EMTs must have 2+ years experience working 911 and have
direct communications to DEC, consider use of mechanical compressor, Personal Water Crafts (PWCs) do not
carry medical equipment and do not replace Paramedics or EMTs on boats

•  All events that do not require a Leval determination, must have 911 and CPR/AED access

8

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 7010

EFFECTIVE DATE: 4/1/25

APPENDIX B

DEFINITIONS SPECIAL EVENT MEDICAL RESOURCES

CPR & 911 Access: Event staﬀ and/or safety personnel have the capability to notify 911 of any
medical emergency and to provide CPR/AED access per San Francisco EMS Agency System
Standards [within ﬁve (5) minutes in 90% of occurrences]. All events should meet this
requirement regardless of crowd size.

First Aid Station with Emergency Medical Technician (EMT): A ﬁxed or mobile facility with the
ability to provide ﬁrst aid level care staﬀed by at least one EMT or higher skill level personnel.
First Aid level care is deﬁned as treatment of minor medical conditions and injuries by care
providers that have received training in First Aid, at the EMT level. Examples of First Aid care are
cleaning, bandaging and treating simple wounds such as scrapes and shallow cuts, providing
cold packs for Musculo-skeletal strains and bruises, and giving drinking water and a place to rest
for patients who are mildly dehydrated. Each Fixed First Aid i shall have an AED and MCI Kit
present at all times. Examples of a First Aid Station are a tent, a clinic, an ambulance or vehicle
of some type. The ﬁrst aid station must have 911 communications capability. EMTs who are
employees of locally permitted ambulance provider agencies are recommended due to their
familiarity with local policy, procedure and protocol. It is also recommended that any event
employing multiple First Aid Stations also have a designated Event Physician Medical Director
and establish a liaison with the Emergency Communications Department and the Fire
Department to improve coordination with 911.

First Aid Station with Paramedic, Nurse, or Physician: A similar facility to a First Aid Station with
an EMT, but staﬀed by at least one Accredited Paramedic, Registered Nurse or Physician, holding
a current California license. It is preferred that the Nurse and Physician be experienced in
emergency medical care and triage of seriously ill or injured patients to higher levels of care.
Examples would be RN’s with Emergency Medicine, Critical care, or Urgent Care backgrounds, or
Nurse Practitioners or other mid-level provider licensees with similar experience. Examples of
appropriate Physicians would be those with Emergency Medicine, Family Practice, Sports
Medicine, Internal Medicine or Trauma Care specialization. Physicians and/or Nurses are
recommended for large crowd sizes or events needing sobering services; Paramedics may be
substituted for smaller size crowds as outlines in the Guidelines for Medical Resource in Special
Events Matrix in Appendix A.

BLS (Basic Life Support) Ambulance: An ambulance staﬀed by two EMTs or Paramedics working
at a BLS level. BLS units may be utilized for ﬁrst response (as a Mobile Team) or to substitute for
a ﬁxed First Aid Station with an EMT, not may NOT transport unless the following criteria are
met in Section X above. In cases where a patient has a life-threatening condition, a dedicated
BLS Ambulance may transport only if the ETA to the closest receiving hospital is less than the
ETA of responding ALS resources.

9

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 7010

EFFECTIVE DATE: 4/1/25

ALS (Advanced Life Support) Ambulance: An ambulance staﬀed by at least one Accredited
Paramedic and one EMT (ALS) or two Accredited Paramedics. An ALS Ambulance is a dedicated
transport unit and must be available for any patient within the event footprint. ALS Ambulances
may NOT be utilized as both transport unit and ﬁxed First Aid Station.

Mobile Resource(s): Mobile or “Roving Medical Resource(s)” are non-ambulance based EMTs
and/or paramedics, or higher-level interventionists, that are deployed throughout the footprint
of a special event and may be on foot, bicycles, or motorized transport car/vehicle (Gator,
Moped, Motorcycle, etc.). Mobile Resource(s) must be able to provide, AT MINIMUM, First Aid
Care at a BLS level, and must have communication capability, by radio, cell phone, or other
medium (See Appendix D). Each Mobile Resource must carry at least one AED at all times. EMTs,
that are dedicated resources within an approved medical plan, may respond, evaluate, and
create Patient Declines Transport (PDT) documentation (NOT Against Medical Advice), for
patients that do not meet the criteria in EMSA Policy 4040, Section 4.2.

Water-Based Resource(s): A medical response resource (BLS or ALS), that is based on a boat,
capable of providing medical interventions and rendezvous with a ground-based transport unit.
If the resources is an EMT, the EMT must have 2+ years of experience working in a 911 system
and have direct communication to DEC or land-based assets. Resources must be located on a
vessel that has an accessible deck, and room/equipment to perform CPR. Each Water-Based
Resource(s) must have communication capability, by radio, cell phone, or other medium.

Sobering Services: Medically supervised treatment for patients with a primary medical issue of
alcohol intoxication as deﬁned by the criteria in Policy 5000, Destination Policy.

Department of Homeland Security SEAR (Special Event Assessment Rating) Designated Events:
Special events that potentially require federal government resources and support. These
designated events potentially require Level 1 or Level 2 EMS resources.

Free Speech Event: Events protected by the First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution.

10

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 7010

EFFECTIVE DATE: 4/1/25

APPENDIX C

ALS CRITERIA GUIDELINES FOR SPECIAL EVENTS

An ALS Assessment shall occur for the following clinical indications at a special event. The
following list is a guide and is not comprehensive. If in doubt or unsure whether patient needs
an ALS assessment, care and/or transport, call for assistance.

A.  Abdominal Pain

1.  Discomfort, pain, unusual sensations if patient is > 40 years old and has cardiac

history

2.  Severe generalized abdominal pain

B.  Breathing

1.  Respirations > 30 min, abnormal respiratory patterns, patient in tripod position
2.  Audible wheezing
3.  Need for inhaler or no improvement after self-administration
4.  Asthma attack or medical history with need for intubation

C.  Burns

1.  All thermal burns except minor heat-related, superﬁcial burns
2.  Chemical and/or electrical burns

D.  Cardiac

1.  Suspected acute coronary symptoms
2.  Irregular heart rate
3.  Chest pain

E.  CVA/Stroke

1.  Suspected stroke with associated symptoms

F.  Diabetic

1.  Patient with history of diabetes with decreased mental status, is unable to
swallow, has rapid respirations, fails to respond to oral glucose, suspected
ketoacidosis

G.  Environmental

1.  Hypothermia or Hyperthermia with co-morbidities (i.e., elderly, illness, trauma,

alcohol and/or drug-use)

2.  Suspected drug-induced hyperthermia
3.  Temperature greater than 100.5° F or less than 96.5° F

11

POLICY REFERENCE NO: 7010

EFFECTIVE DATE: 4/1/25

H.  Mental Status

1.  Glasgow Coma Score less than or equal to 13
2.  Abnormal behavior with unstable vital signs
3.  Abnormal behavior with suspected drug or alcohol intoxication
4.  Sobering patients that do not meet Policy 5000 “Sobering Services” criteria

I.  Vital Signs

1.  Hypotension (Systolic < 90)
2.  Signs of shock (Systolic < 90, Pulse > 120)
3.  Sustained tachycardia
4.  Hypertension (Systolic >160 or Diastolic > 110)
5.  Hypotension and severe bradycardia

J.  OB/GYN

1.  All patients with known or suspected pregnancy with an OB/GYN complaint

K.  Seizure

1.  Any seizure or seizure-like activity reported prior to arrival

L.  Trauma

1.  All patients meeting Policy 5001 Trauma Triage Criteria and/or patients meeting

base hospital contact criteria within Policy 5001

2.  Patients with moderate to severe pain requiring pain control

12

