SAN FRANCISCO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY

Policy Reference No.: 8050

Effective Date:  September, 1, 2009
Review Date: January 1, 2011
Supersedes:  February 1, 2004

HAZARDOUS MATERIALS INCIDENT FIELD POLICY

I.  PURPOSE

A.  This policy establishes guidelines for the response of ambulance providers to
incidents involving hazardous materials or weapons of mass destruction.

II.  AUTHORITY

A.  California Health and Safety Code, Division 2.5, Sections 1797.150,
1797.151, 1797.204, 1797.214, 1798.6
B.  California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Sections 100172 and 100175
C.  29 Code of Federal Regulations 1910.120

III. POLICY

A.  All EMS personnel, public and private, responding to the scene will follow
current San Francisco Fire Department (SFFD) Hazardous Materials (HAZMAT)
Standard Operating Procedures (SOP) dated January 2008 once the presence of
known or potential hazardous materials have been identified.

IV. PROCEDURE

A.  Initial Ambulance Response

1.  If upon arrival of the first ambulance to the scene, the incident is

determined to be or is suspicious of a hazardous material, ambulance
providers will

a.  First provide for their own safety.
b.  Ensure notification of the SFFD HAZMAT team.
c.  Follow the HAZMAT team leader’s direction for scene

tasking, such as isolating the scene if this has not been done
prior to arrival.

d.  Coordinate with other public safety personnel at the scene to
establish the Incident Command System (ICS) per the Multi-
Casualty Incident (MCI) Plan.  If the ICS has been established,
report to the Medical Group Supervisor on site.
2.  Ambulance providers will park uphill and upwind from the site (see
attached diagram entitled “Hazardous Materials Incident Control
Zones” from the SFFD Manual.

Page 1

Policy Reference No.: 8050
Effective Date:  September, 1, 2009

3.  Ambulance providers will isolate and deny entry to the site, and

confirm that fire and police have been notified to respond through the
SFFD Communications Center.

4.  The highest-ranking officer from the SFFD will assume the role of

Incident Commander. The paramedic or the Communications Officer
(if the MCI Plan is activated) will notify the Base Hospital Physician
of all pertinent information via standard Base Physician Consultation
mechanism.

B. Approach and Treatment of the Victims

1.  If the event is thought to be a chemical, nuclear, or biological

(Weapons of Mass Destruction) event, the ambulance crew must first
protect themselves, then deny entry to the area and activate the
MMTF.  Paramedics are not to physically examine or treat patients
who are contaminated and are a potential threat until the arrival of
HAZMAT personnel.

2.  Follow the Incident Commander’s instructions regarding:

a. Approaching the victims and/or contact with anyone coming

from within the Hot Zone.

b. Victim decontamination.
c. Use of Personal Protective Equipment.
d. Minimal medical treatment of victims is to be rendered in the

“Cold Zone” area of the incident site per SFFD HAZMAT Standard
Operating Procedures.  Examples of appropriate medical treatment may
include airway control, positive pressure ventilation, and administration of
certain antidotes, such as atropine.  Standard prehospital medical care will
be rendered once decontamination has occurred as directed by the Incident
Commander.  For examples of these levels of care, consult current San
Francisco MMTF treatment protocols.

e. Follow current EMS Agency and MMTF treatment protocols.

Under no circumstance, should ambulance personnel use Personal Protective
equipment or assist in patient decontamination without completing the required
training.

Page 2

FUNCTION
/CORE
COMPETEN
CY:

Personnel:
Dispatchers

1st Responders
and BLS

TRAINING STANDARDS MATRIX FOR EMS PERSONNEL

Policy Reference No.: 8050
Effective Date:  September, 1, 2009

AWARENESS

Ability to
recognize a
potential WMD
incident

PATIENT
DECONTAMI
-NATION

Ability to
decontaminate
a patient

TRANSPORT
OF DECON
PATIENTS

Ability to
identify a
contaminated
patient

TREATMENT
OF DECON
PATIENTS
Ability to treat
patients for
exposure to
WMD agents

Awareness
training (EMSS
curriculum)
8 hour state
course (HM
awareness)

N/A

N/A

N/A

N/A

Awareness
training

48 hour state
course (First
Responder
Operations-
Decon)
48 hour state
course (FRO-
D)

ALS

8 hour state
course

Awareness
training

40 hour state
course

3.  If the MCI Plan is not activated, contact the Base Hospital Physician
Consultant (BHPC) who will give medical direction regarding patient
treatment.  For BHPC, you must be prepared to give the following
information:

-Identification of the Hazardous Materials Incident
-Name of the agent, route, and length of exposure
-Number of victims involved
-Medical assessment of the victims
-Degree of decontamination in progress or completed

If the MCI Plan is activated, proceed according to MCI plan for patient assessment,
treatment and transport.  If the hazardous material incident is part of a Weapons of
Mass Destruction release and the Metropolitan Medical Response System is
activated, be aware that hospital destination may be altered.  Follow appropriate
direction according to the Incident Command System chain of command.

4.  Patients must be decontaminated prior to transport. Per Section 5 of the

“Hazardous Material Operating Guide of January 2008, published by the San
Francisco Fire Department. The guidelines for removal of decontamination
include washing with large quantities of water, removal of contaminated clothing
and jewelry, and continued washing until clothes are removed. This procedure

Page 3

Policy Reference No.: 8050
Effective Date:  September, 1, 2009

includes petrochemical decontamination. All clothing and jewelry must be
bagged.
5.  Enroute to the receiving hospital, the ambulance provider shall notify the
facility with the information as noted in II.B.3. as well as all medical
intervention, BHPC recommendations, and changes in the patient’s status.

C.   Arrival at the Hospital

1.  In virtually all cases, performing on-scene decontamination is preferable to

transporting contaminated patients. Under no circumstances will ambulances
transport contaminated patients.

2.  After transfer of patient care, the paramedics will follow current SFFD

HAZMAT policy for decontamination of themselves and their equipment.

3.  If contaminated patients are transported to the hospital, ensure Receiving
Hospital notification and follow individual hospital’s decontamination
procedures.

4.  Clearing Contaminated Ambulances for Return to the Field: A contaminated
ambulance must be properly decontaminated before returning to service. This
can be conducted by designated members of the SFFD HazMat team or any
Environmental Health Emergency Responder in the Environmental Health
Section of DPH. The final decision on returning an ambulance to service lies
with the ambulance provider.

ATTACHED DIAGRAM: From Hazardous Materials Operating Guide, SFFD, Jan/08.

Page 4

