 2.06 CHEST PAIN / ACUTE CORONARY SYNDROME

Strive for total on-scene time of less than or equal to 15 minutes.

BLS Treatment

•  Assess circulation, airway, breathing, and responsiveness.
•  Bilateral blood pressures.
•  Oxygen as indicated.
•  Position of comfort.
•  Aspirin
•

If readily accessible and SBP >90, may assist patient with the administration of their
physician prescribed sublingual nitroglycerin.

•  NPO, unless otherwise noted.
•  Either list patient medications on PCR or gather medication vials for transport to hospital.

ALS Treatment

Establish a large bore (18G or larger) IV with Normal Saline TKO. If possible, establish a
second large bore NS lock in the same arm.

12-lead EKG within 10 minutes of patient contact:

o  Complete 12-Lead ECG prior to administration of Nitroglycerin or pain medication.
o  Transmit if EKG interpretation is “STEMI” and notify appropriate STAR center.
o  Apply “stand-by” defibrillation pads to all EKG confirmed STEMI patients.

Nitroglycerin: DO NOT administer Nitroglycerin to patients who have taken a
phosphodiesterase inhibitor (erectile dysfunction drugs) within the following time frames:

o  Sildenafil (Viagra, Revatio) or Vardenafil (Levitra, Staxin) < 24 hours
o  Tadalafil (Cialis, Adcirca) < 48 hours

Chest pain of suspected ischemic origin that is refractory to maximum anti-ischemic
medications (ASA and nitroglycerin) at any level (scale 1 – 10) may be treated with Fentanyl.
Doses may be started at lower levels than for traumatic or other types of pain treatment.

•  Follow Protocol 7.10 12-Lead EKG.
•  Ondansetron as needed for nausea.
•

If hemodynamically unstable, go to Protocol 2.16 Shock.

_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
SAN FRANCISCO EMS AGENCY
Effective: 10/01/25
Supersedes:  10/01/24

Page 1 of 2

 2.06 CHEST PAIN / ACUTE CORONARY SYNDROME

Documentation

•  “At Patient Side” Time.

•  VS including bilateral BPs and room air O2 saturation.

•  Reassessment of patient symptoms, complaints and vital signs.” At minimum, two sets of
vital signs and a reassessment should be done and documented in the PCR after any
intervention.

•  “O-P-Q-R-S-T symptom assessment:

O = Onset (Sudden or gradual)
P = Provoke (What were you doing when the pain started? Does anything make it
better or worse?)
Q = Quality (What does the pain feel like?)
R = Region/Radiate (Where is the pain? Does it go anywhere else?)
S = Severity (On a scale of 1-10, 10 being the worst pain you have ever had, how
would you rate that pain now? How would you rate that pain at its worst or during
exertion/movement?)
T = Time (When or what time did this start?)

•  Aspirin given by EMS. Note if patient self-administered Aspirin or if it was given by

someone else (e.g. medical provider).

•  EKG findings.

•  List patient identifiers on ALL transmitted EKGs:

o  Patient Last Name + First Initial
o  Gender
o  Age
o  Provider agency and unit number

_____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
SAN FRANCISCO EMS AGENCY
Effective: 10/01/25
Supersedes:  10/01/24

Page 2 of 2

