BLS – FAQ Link
BLS – FAQ Link
BLS – FAQ Link

ALS

2.09 PAIN CONTROL
2.09 PAIN CONTROL

Position of comfort, NPO unless otherwise noted, Oxygen as indicated

Normal Saline
IV/IO of Normal Saline TKO.

Manage pain. Manage N/V.

Severity

Nausea/Vomiting?

Ondansetron
Ondansetron
4 mg slow IVP/IM over 2-5
4 mg slow IVP/IM over 2-5
minutes
minutes

- or -
- or -

4 mg ODT PO
4 mg ODT PO

   All routes q20min up
   All routes q20min up

to total dose 12 mg PRN
to total dose 12 mg PRN

Pain score 1-3

Pain score 4-10

Ibuprofen
600 mg PO x 1 dose

Ketamine

IV/IO 0.25 mg/kg in 100 mL of NS D5W slow infusion over 10 minutes

Ketorolac
Ketorolac
Dose: 15 mg IV/IO
Dose: 15 mg IV/IO
bolus x1 dose
bolus x1 dose

--or--
--or--

30 mg IM x1 dose
30 mg IM x1 dose

-or-

IN 0.5mg/kg

Max dose for all routes is 30 mg. NO REPEAT DOSING

Fentanyl
50 mcg IV/IO slow IV push (over 1 minute).

OR

   May be repeated every 5 minutes if SBP > 90mmHg. Maximum

dose of 200 mcg total.

--or--

100 mcg IN or IM (IN preferred).

   May be repeated every 10 minutes if SBP > 90mmHg. Maximum

dose of 200 mcg total.

Consider Midazolam for premedication before cardioversion,
Consider Midazolam for premedication before cardioversion,
external pacing, and other painful procedures.
external pacing, and other painful procedures.

Midazolam
Midazolam
Dose: 5mg IM x1 or 5 mg slow push IV/IO. Maximum dose 5 mg IV/IO
Dose: 5mg IM x1 or 5 mg slow push IV/IO. Maximum dose 5 mg IV/IO

Make Base Hospital Contact
Patients may NOT be released AMA after receiving Fentanyl or
Ketamine without Base Hospital Physician consult

Effective: 10/01/24
Supersedes: 10/01/21

2.09 PAIN CONTROL

BLS Treatment

•  Position of comfort.
•  NPO
•  Oxygen as indicated.

ALS Treatment

IV/IO with Normal Saline TKO.

•
•  Mild to Moderate Pain: either PO Ibuprofen or IV/IM/IO Ketorolac.
•  Moderate to Severe Pain: Ketamine either IV/IO 0.25 mg/kg in 100 ml of NS/D5W slow infusion

over 10 minutes OR IN 0.5 mg/kg. Max dose for all routes is 30 mg, no repeat dosing.
•  Moderate to Severe Pain: either IN/IV/IO Fentanyl and can be used in conjunction with

Ibuprofen and/or Ketorolac.

•  Ondansetron  as needed.
•  Document pain score and vital signs before and after medication administration on PCR.

•  Patients may NOT be released AMA after receiving Fentanyl or Ketamine without Base

Base Hospital Contact Criteria

Hospital Physician consult.

Notes

•  When possible, utilizing a pain scale in determining pain level is preferred. As a general

guideline:

o  Mild to Moderate Pain: Score 1-3
o  Moderate to Severe Pain: Score 4-6
o  Severe Pain: Score 7-10

•  Use of non-narcotic pain medication is preferred at all levels of pain.
•  Ketorolac may be given sequentially with either Ketamine or Fentanyl as a secondary

medication.

•  Ketamine should not be combined with Fentanyl.
•  For mild to moderate pain that is refractory to Ibuprofen and/or Ketorolac consider

Fentanyl titrating to effect (in accordance with medication guidelines).

•

•  Fentanyl or Midazolam may act synergistically to cause respiratory depression and should
not be combined unless seizures or other indications for midazolam use is present. Contact
Base Hospital MD for consultation if needed for this combined use.
If utilizing 2 or more doses of Fentanyl, Ketamine, Midazolam, patient shall be placed on
continuous end tidal CO2 monitoring. A trend of increasing EtCO2 readings (2 or more
readings, 10% or more, above baseline) indicates the need for immediate re- assessment
of patient’s respiratory status to include rate and depth of respirations. Ventilatory
support should be provided as necessary to return ETCO2 to baseline.

•  All injectable pain medications shall be cross-checked with a Paramedic (secondarily an

EMT) for correct medication and dose at time of administration unless transporting in the
back of an ambulance without a second attendant.

•  Consider Midazolam for premedication before cardioversion, external pacing, and other
painful procedures. 5mg IM x 1 or 5 mg slow push IV/IO. Maximum dose 5 mg IV/IO

      San Francisco EMS Agency
       Effective 10/01/24
   Supersedes 10/01/21

Page 1 of 1

