2.14 STROKE

BLS Treatment

•  Position of comfort.
•  NPO
•  Oxygen as indicated.
•  Perform Cincinnati Prehospital Stroke Scale Assessment (see Comments).
•

Include temperature measurement in vital signs.

ALS Treatment

•
•

•
•

IV/IO, Normal Saline TKO.
If blood glucose <60 mg/dl, unmeasurable, or patient is a known diabetic, administer
Dextrose
If SBP < 90 or signs of poor perfusion administer Normal Saline fluid bolus.
If potential stroke is suspected with patient last seen normal 24 hours or less from the time
of patient contact, immediately transport patient to a designated Stroke Receiving Hospital
(see Policy 5000 Destination).

•  Notify the destination hospital of a Stroke Alert as early as possible.

Comments

Cincinnati Prehospital Stroke Scale Assessment (CPSS):  Apply CPSS if you suspect that the
sudden neurological impairment is due to stroke. If patient scores “abnormal” in any of the
following 3 tests, there is a 72% likelihood of stroke:
1.  Facial Droop - Have patient show teeth or smile:

Normal: both sides of face move equally.
Abnormal: one side of face does not move as well as the other side.

2.  Arm Weakness - Patient closes eyes and holds both arms straight out for 10 seconds:

Normal: both arms move the same or both arms do not move at all.
Abnormal: one arm does not move, or one arm drifts down compared with the other.
3.  Abnormal Speech - Have the patient repeat a statement such as, “You can’t teach an old

dog new tricks”:

Normal: patient uses correct words with no slurring.
Abnormal: patient slurs words, uses the wrong words, or is unable to speak.

Additional history pertinent to stroke patients
•  Differentiate last seen normal time (before bed) from initiation of symptoms, record as a

24-hour clock time.

•  Determine any symptoms of potential active bleeding such as melena.
•
•

If patient had a prior stroke evaluate baseline neurologic status and any chronic deficits.
If readily available, include family or caretaker phone number in history.

Page 1 of 1

SAN FRANCISCO EMS AGENCY
Effective: 10/01/22
Supersedes 10/29/18

