2.18 OPIOID WITHDRAWAL

BLS Treatment

•  Position of comfort.
•  NPO except as noted below.
•  Oxygen as indicated.

ALS Treatment
OPIATE WITHDRAWAL

Assess for symptoms of opioid withdrawal, which may include diaphoresis, nausea,
vomiting, abdominal pain, and agitation.
•  For symptomatic suspected opioid withdrawal due to drug abstinence or

Naloxone administration, perform a COWS (Clinical Opiate Withdrawal Score). If
COWS greater than or equal to 8, assess for Buprenorphine/Suboxone eligibility
(see Appendix A).

COWS Link and QR Code

•  Document the following:

Notes

Initial and Secondary COWS

o  Administration of Naloxone/Buprenorphine (Route, Dose, Complications)
o
o  Reason for Non-Enrollment (Exclusion Criteria)
o  Reason if Non-Transport of Enrolled Patient

•  A patient is considered enrolled by receiving their first dose of Buprenorphine by

EMS.

•

If a patient receives Buprenorphine but does not wish to be transported, a Base
Hospital Physician shall be contacted under Policy 4040 for non-transport.
Consider contacting the Community Paramedicine Captain (CP5) at (628) 200-
1139 for additional resources and follow up information for the patient.

Page 1 of 3

SAN FRANCISCO EMS AGENCY
Effective: 10/01/2024
Supersedes:04/01/23

2.18 OPIOID WITHDRAWAL

Appendix A – Clinical Opiate Withdrawal Score (COWS)

Page 2 of 3

SAN FRANCISCO EMS AGENCY
Effective: 10/01/2024
Supersedes:04/01/23

2.18 OPIOID WITHDRAWAL

Appendix B – Buprenorphine Local Optional Scope of Practice Protocol

Page 3 of 3

SAN FRANCISCO EMS AGENCY
Effective: 10/01/2024
Supersedes:04/01/23

